All right. All right.
So, welcome everyone to the datab bricks
boot camp. I'm just checking the chat.
It is just crazy like we have big number
of audience today around 2,600
watching. So welcome to the datab bricks
podcast. I'm really excited about it. I
was like preparing a lot of things for
you. So
um it's my first time let's say doing
this boot camp. So it's going to be
amazing. I'm really excited to see the
shots to see the interaction as well
with you uh to see where you guys come
from. I'm sorry whether this is too late
for some of you but um I think it's
going to worth it. So now um yeah
welcome. I'm excited about it and yeah I
think this is really amazing to do it in
this new year. I'm happy that the first
session that I'm doing now is about data
bricks because it's going to be an
amazing tool that you can add to your
resume to your to your career. Um so
now about uh what I'm doing currently.
I'm just preparing uh let's say the
Python course to be finalized and then
publish it in the YouTube. So it's going
to be amazing preparing SQL challenges
as well for you and those boot camps. So
now uh I thought about it like if I
going to make the boot camp let's say uh
I'm going to record it and start doing
the sessions and the courses it might
take long time. That's why I thought why
not just go in boot camp live chat with
you and start showing you what you can
do with this tool with the data bricks.
So now if you don't know uh don't know
me already I am Baron I am uh living
here in Germany I come from Syria I have
master's degree in data engineering I
worked around 17 years in data projects
and um I led a data engineering project
at Mercedes-Benz we built in the last
five years one of the biggest data lake
houses in data bricks where I led end to
end the whole projects for let's say
data engineering analytics AI and Yeah.
Uh we connected around 40 analytical
projects uh to them to this platform. I
was uh the leader of it end to end. We
had around 20 people on the projects. So
we had data engineers, analysts and we
all worked in one platform and that was
data bricks. So that's why I collected
in the last five years a lot of
experience about this tool and yeah I
thought I'm going to share now with you
how we worked why we need this tool and
to give you let's say little bit
insights about the the data bricks and I
noticed one thing about it that uh the
courses that are available online that
was I see that is really expensive so I
saw there were some courses about like I
don't know 1,000 or 7,000 just teaching
data bricks. So I thought this is really
crazy because it is a huge wall for
anyone that wants to improve their
career. Yeah, they want to learn this
tool. So I thought uh why not to make a
boot camp for it to tell you that guys
about it and uh why we need it. So uh
it's as I said it's two days completely
for free and um yeah I'm going to start
recording it as well and then maybe put
it in the data academy. Um but yeah it
is um something that I wanted to do long
time ago like as I'm teaching scale and
Python I said I really want to teach
about data bricks because we are doing
amazing things. So that's why I'm really
happy really really happy that I'm
finally uh talking about it. Now um one
thing about this podcast um first of all
I saw a lot of question about in this
direction there will be no certification
from me. So I will not like now after
the course or the podcast I'm going to
give you certificate or something. All
what I want to do is to just make you
familiar with this tool with this
platform. The thing is this is yeah
considered to be let's say an expert
tool. It is not that easy like let's say
you are learning an Excel or or let's
say PowerBI or SQL. It is a huge
platform and it might be scary
especially for data analysts. That's why
I thought uh yeah I'm going to try uh
let's say to give you the mindset how
things works behind the scene and try
step by step to tell you about uh uh
this platform. So that's why I will not
teach you only about the UI as you know
me. I want you to understand the idea. I
want you to understand how things works
behind the scenes. Why we have data
bricks like uh why we have the unity
catalog and all those terms because if I
go now I just show you the UI it might
take like only two hours and we are
done. So it's not the purpose of that to
let you know about the UI. It's all
about to understand uh why we have such
a platform why the companies are now
like moving toward data bricks and um so
I will not of course cover in the two
days the whole uh platform it's a huge
platform so I'm going to start let's say
to pick the thing that is really
relevant for you as a data analyst and
data engineer so you will not be
learning everything but I'm going to
choose for you the most important topic
for you and then you can practice on
your own but I just want to break the
ice between you and such a platform. Uh
one more thing this video is not
sponsored by anyone. So it's not
sponsored by data bricks by anyone. I
talked to them about it actually.
[snorts] Uh but we didn't like reach any
anything that we can say okay they are
sponsoring this. So I'm now telling you
like the full honest opinion about this
data platform. And uh yeah and this
gives me as well a little bit freedom to
talk the way that I want about the
platform. So nothing here is sponsored.
It's totally free for you. So um um
nothing to pay here. And um yeah now the
thing is um last year datab bricks was
let's say as a student or you want to
learn it you have to pay let's say some
licenses or let's say for the usage. But
we have good news that by the end of the
last year they um created a free edition
for you. So that means if you want to
follow me in this boot camp you don't
have to pay anything. You're going to
get free account from datab bricks for
totally for free and as well all the
materials the GitHub the notion
everything that I'm giving you as well
for free. So you don't have to pay
anything. Creating the account can be
very easy. There is nothing to be
installed locally at your PC. So you
don't have to go and install anything.
You just need your web browser and
that's it guys. So um and one more thing
uh that I wanted to say that um about
data bricks it is just a tool okay so it
is not something that's let's say you
have to deep dive and understand every
single detail about data bricks and I
recommend this as well for all other
tools yeah so don't go deep in each tool
and say I am now the datab bricks expert
or the powerbi expert you just have to
learn the basics because the thing is
those tools comes and go. So now you're
going to learn about it. You just try to
understand the idea behind it. Uh how we
work because I am pretty sure that over
the time we will not use data bricks.
We're going to use another tool. So it
is just a tool and uh and of course uh
it's important to understand the skills
how to use it and then easily going to
jump between data breaks or maybe you're
going to go to snowflakes and so on. So
don't uh let's say get attached very
very strongly to one tool to one
platform and um yeah so learn the skills
behind it and uh yeah now about the
tools or platforms they have they can
either make our life easier or our life
harder so and that's it so that's why I
think data bricks makes our life easier
as data engineers and analysts and uh
one more thing actually those platforms
are at the part they were not designed
for data analysts like you. Okay. So I
know that uh we have here a lot of data
engineers and as well we have uh data
analyst but I'm going to tell you
working with big data it is not
something that's designed for data
analyst data analyst like always used
let's say SQL or maximum maximum they
get to power. So now we're going to push
harder and we're we're going to take you
to a new platform which is a place where
you work with big data with a scalable
system and at the same time it is easy.
So um it is not that hard. Um so yeah um
I'm going to show you now the road map
where we're going to start and yeah I'm
going to go and share my screen. I hope
that you guys can hear me well about the
questions that you are posting in the
chat. I will not be able now to read the
the chat and answer questions. It's
going to be um there is will be a
session where we going to go through
your questions. Okay. But of course you
can talk to each other and start
chatting but don't focus on the shots.
Focus on what I'm uh trying to say and
what I'm explaining. Now let's go to the
notion. So now I'm sharing my screen and
uh one of the things that I have
prepared for you is uh the boot camp. So
the boot camp completely let's say all
the links and everything I put
everything in the notion you can use it
after the boot camp as well. It's not
only for now it's not only for day one
and day two. You can take it as well and
uh work on it let's say um after the
sessions and you can extend it. You can
go and copy the notion road map and you
can extend it maybe for more content. So
I'm just giving you let's say the first
step okay this platform and I'm trying
to make it as um yeah as easy as
possible for you. Um yeah so now at the
starts we have some let's say uh some
important links and which skills you
need again for that analyst. I'm going
to show some SQLs. So you should have
some basics of the skills but we will
not do crazy things. We're going to do
only like select join where and those
stuff. So we will not be doing some
intensive SQLs and for that engineers
for tomorrow uh you should have some
python pi spark pi spark I would say
it's not necessary because uh I'm going
to show you very basic things but at
least python skills for that engineers
now all the links are here so what do we
have we have a notion road map that's we
are seeing now here we have uh data sets
you can download them I have prepared
now for the analyst parts data sets and
of course if you don't want to use my
data sets. You can use your own. So if
you have anything that is at your end,
you can use them. You don't have to use
mine. Uh the discord it is here. I made
the channel where we can discuss after
the boot camp. So if you have question
that I didn't answer or something, you
can go over here and start discussing
with us. I will be checking the discord
channel and try to answer as much as
possible. There are as well. Uh I saw in
the community we have a lot of amazing
people like the black soul. He assisted
me with the questions. So go there and
ask questions.
or discuss uh the GitHub here I'm going
to put all the codes everything that we
are using in the GitHub so they will be
available as well here so those about
the links uh now about the agenda so the
day one I splited it into introduction
and data analyt analytics so that means
introduction it is as well important for
you as a data engineer
uh so the whole day is not only for
analytics okay so data engineers don't
leave stay here get the introduction and
of
During my first session about the data
analytics, I'm going to be explaining a
lot of things like the Unity catalog,
the clusters, the the compute and stuff
like that. So I would say for that
engineer stick for the for the two days
for the second day is going to be about
data engineering purely for that
engineering. So what we're going to do,
I'm going to introduce some concepts uh
some things that are relevant uh let's
say about data bricks and as well some
generic things and then uh I'm going to
try to build with you like let's say
very mini data lake house. Okay. So
we're going to build bronze, silver,
gold uh using very simple let's say
files. uh I will be using the same data
that I used in the SQL data warehouse
because uh the data was really let's say
uh not uh um yeah not ready and the data
was a really good example on how we do
transformations. So that's why we're
going to build the SQL data warehouse
but using now data uh data bricks and
data lakehouse concepts. So now about
today I will uh give you an introduction
about what is data bricks. Um we're
going to have 15 minute break and then
uh we're going to go um let's say into
all topics of data analyst inside data
bricks and at the end we're going to do
a Q&A and recap. Now the thing is this
is the first time I'm doing this boot
camp. So I don't know how this how long
this going to take. I hope I hope this
going to take less than 3 hours. But um
yeah, it depends on let's say the energy
or let's say how fast I'm going through
the topics. But I'm going to take my
time. So it's like I'm your friend. We
are sitting together and I'm explaining
things that I know. So if things take
longer then it's going to take longer
but I hope not. So um that's why uh I
will try my best to speed up a little
bit. I'll cover as much as I can. And
one thing before we kick off, let's say
the first part, it is totally okay if
you like let's say 30% or 40 40% of
things that I'm explaining you don't
understand. Okay? Because I'm going to
try to bring a lot of topics, a lot of
things that are maybe not that relevant
yet for you as a data analyst or new for
you. So if you get from the whole boot
camp only 60% 70% then I'm totally happy
about it. Okay. So, uh um because you
cannot explain the whole thing in two
days. Okay. So, that means after the
boot camp try to read, try to cover the
gap. Okay. Barat said about the Delta
Lakehouse. What is the Delta file and
stuff? So, you have to uh to do your
homework as well and try to uh
understand the gap that you have. Okay.
But I don't believe that you're going to
cover the 100% from only two days. This
will not be possible. Now, um about
Yeah.
about the first day as I said we're
going to go about some theory as you
know me I don't go immediately to the UI
we go through the uh through the theory
I want you always to understand the UI
as I said it is not that important you
can do it without me you can just check
I don't know some tutorials on YouTube
and maybe you understand the UI um but
more than what is for me more important
I want you to understand the things the
theory and uh with that it's going to
stick on your head and you're going
understand why we are doing what in data
bricks and at the ends by the way they
will be homeworks so I will uh after
we're done today I'm going to send you
like two homeworks one for the
introduction I have prepared already the
homework for the first module but for
the second module I have to prepare it
after the session so I'm going to send
everything in the email as well about
the homeworks um homeworks uh they going
to take I believe at least 3 4 days okay
so you cannot cover it uh for the next
day so So, it's a homework that you take
your time and do it. And uh yeah, for
each module, there will be at the end
some tasks for you. And I'm going to say
uh we're going to start. Let's let's go
and start. So, now um of course, I don't
have PowerPoint prepared or anything. As
I said, as a friend, I'm going to uh
explain things. So, I will now jump to
another tool. Just let me try to do this
now.
Um let's go to the first first point.
Why why we have data bricks?
What is the idea behind the whole thing?
Um
uh so yeah this time I'm not I'm not
sketching because sketching I've noticed
it's going to take a lot of time uh
doing the whole sketching. So that's why
I will use now another tool for the
presentation. So now the whole idea I
want you to understand the whole idea
why why do we have it? Now
let's say that you are uh let me just
bring this here and uh start recording.
So now
um this this is the whole idea. So you
are a data engineer, a data analyst to
like whatever and you need to do some
processing of the data. You want to
query data, you want to do aggregations,
you want to do some data
transformations. So now what you do
usually you have like at the start we
had only one machine and we send our
query uh the query going to be processed
and then somehow we're going to get a
result back from this machine and we're
going to get our result our data. Now
this worked for us as a data analyst and
data engineers um for some time until
the company starts to let's say provide
more data. So the data in the companies
are getting bigger and bigger because we
are able to connect machines. We are
able to connect uh let's say new sources
of data. So as this goes big as the data
goes big in the companies we have as
well to have as well bigger uh
processing machines. So bigger server
bigger uh computing resources. So what
we what we have done at the start we
went and start buying bigger servers.
Okay. So uh bigger machines. But the
thing is at the ends like whatever you
get it will not be enough this one
machine it might break this one machine
still takes a lot of time and this
concepts you cannot scale the compute as
you are scaling your data so that's why
came the first idea like this is around
20 years ago I I know I went very um
very far away but this is the first idea
the Hadoop
so what What we said at the start we
said okay you know what this is this one
single point of computing will not work.
What we have to do is to go and split
your compute into multiple nodes
multiple machines. So we need multiple
things. Okay. And now as well we split
our data. So we went and split splitted
our data into those machines. Okay. So
now
uh let me just copy and paste. So we
splitted the data into different
machines and this is awesome already
because you know what if one of those
machines did pale that's totally okay
because we have the other machines and
as well at the same time uh we are
faster because they going to process
those chunks faster than one big chunk.
So that's why after they are done
they're going to go and uh give us the
data. Let me just get something like
this. you're going to get the final
results and it's going to be combined
together so that we got the final result
like this. Now this way of splitting
into multiple servers, multiple machines
that was an amazing because it speed up
uh the data and whatever like however
the data is big we were able to oh I see
that we have people that are invited. I
don't know why.
So please don't go in uh as I'm
explaining now. So that was a great way
to scale with the Hadoop. So that's why
the first idea of how to handle the big
data and we data engineers were happy
about it and we start doing um uh big
data processing using uh Hadoop but
there were one big issue with the Hadoop
it is really annoying that the data
going to be stored inside our hard
disks. So the data is still let's say
slow the processing still slow because
each of those small servers has to
interact with your read and write
activity on your hard disk and this as
well takes time. So that's why this was
let's say the biggest uh drawback of the
Hadoop that's it is using your hard disk
to store those chunks of data and that
was not enough that was not enough
that's why another team I think around
209
or something like that spark game team
said you know what the idea is great
we're going to have this splits but
instead
just put the data in the memory
So use the memory of those servers.
Don't put it in their hard disk. Now of
course if you are using memories uh it
is like limited with the size and stuff
but it was an great idea. So that means
we going to put the data inside the um
yeah the RAMs or the memory and this is
the let's say currently the best concept
on how to process big data. This is this
is the solution currently on how to do
it. But um we don't have now currently
better than this idea on how to process
data and of course there were like next
problems you know like uh how we going
to program this how we going to code
this and of course at that time pi spark
was the sorry the python was uh the best
thing
uh to do so that's why they thought okay
we're going to put the whole commands
and whole thing inside python and people
going to use just our library so pi
spark network in order to build the uh
this uh setup. So that's why
um it was easy for us then as a data
engineer to say you know what I know
Python I can work with Python and I can
build this whole thing but so far it was
only data engineers working on this so
or let's say IT people you know
it was uh only for the experts
[laughter]
of data processing so um
so yeah so We d that engineers we start
using pi spark and we start using this
technology and we were ready to process
massive amount of data using the memory
but still still still this is a huge
pain. This is a huge problem because um
we still have to configure a lot of
things. We have to configure the
storage. We have to configure those uh
those nodes like we spend a lot of time
just to make this picture uh in reality
not only theory. So that's why um if we
if we hired let's say data engineers to
do this they going to spend all their
time configuring those servers preparing
the uh let's say the storage the blob
storage and stuff so they were exhausted
the data engineers just to make this
that's why
came data bricks and say it is by the
way the same team so the same people
that's came up with spark and the pi
spark and uh the whole technology they
said okay you know what we should Now
build a platform. We should build
platform. We see the struggle and they
uh f like they started the data bricks
company and they said you know what the
best thing to do we as a data bricks
team we're going to handle the whole
complexity of this setup. So we going to
build something called data bricks. Let
me just put this in the correct layers.
Where is it?
So
yeah so they said you engineers okay get
out get out from this picture it is uh
you are wasting a lot of time here and
we going to make a very let's say we're
going to make a layer for you and uh we
datab bricks team
uh we're going to take care of this
infrastructure to make it easier for you
and you as that engineer here above you
just have to deal with your projects you
don't have to deal with the
infrastructure
The infrastructure is something that's
going to be uh in our hands. You just
focus on your projects, build whatever
you are processing. Focus on the data,
focus on the projects and don't focus on
this here. And uh in few clicks you can
build a complete let's say uh clusters
and uh things like that. But so this was
the main idea of data bricks. Okay. So
it cames all from processing massive
amount of data and uh it came from uh
the spark the Hadoop the spark and then
pispark and now they built this data
platform since I think 2013 uh we have
data bricks and yeah and that engineers
were happy about it. I am I was happy
about it. I start using it around uh
2019 2020 and um it was it was like
easier for them and they can focus on
the projects more and guess what guess
what not only data engineers now we have
data analysts
that are interested or let's say it is
easy now for even data analysts to start
working and uh on this big data platform
so it's not anymore only for the
specialist to work on data bricks as
well for people that are near to the
business and try to answer business
questions. So actually um we have now a
lot of things uh for you as data analyst
and now they are pushing the platform of
course to all different users that they
wants to work with the uh with the data.
So even like the business users now I'm
going to say they can actually start
using data bricks using AI of course. So
now that's why you are here as a data
analyst you want to work with data
bricks you want to extend your knowledge
about this [snorts] and uh uh for us
data engineers it just data bricks just
made our life easier. Okay. So instead
of wasting our time on all the
infrastructure, we get something out of
the box. And now the second benefit for
you as data analyst, it is finally easy
for you to start working with big data.
All right. So so that's was actually the
history. This is the the main idea of
why do we have a data bricks. Now
um so this is the technology. There is
another reason that our datab bricks
company are trying to uh let's say um
explain for us why datab bricks is uh is
there. Let me just go to the second
here. So now yeah
um so now I'm going to tell you from
company perspective why companies are
interested on the data data bricks and
uh this is how they sell it for us. I I
like I think it is correct. Okay. So, uh
it's not something that I I think they
are they are wrong but I have a
different opinion about it as well. So
now the thing is in companies especially
in big ones you don't have like one
central team that is handling the data.
Okay. So you don't have like one central
platform to say uh you know what uh this
is the place single point of truth.
You're going to have different many
teams are building data projects. So you
have departments, you have sectors, you
have a lot of teams, a lot of people. I
I don't know everyone at for example at
Mercedes-Benz it is so huge company it
is like impossible to know everyone that
is actually doing projects. So the thing
is in normally in companies you have
really
um huge number of projects
that are doing something with the data.
So they might doing some AI, the other
are doing some dashboarding, standard
reports and stuff. So you're going to
have a lot of data projects. And the
thing is uh I've seen that of course and
it was really painful because
uh let me just take here an icon like
database
each of those projects like if you start
if you are a team and you start building
any projects um you first you have to
decide in the tools. So you're going to
say you know what let's go and use for
this team an Oracle database. The other
team going to say ah let's go and use
the SQL server. Third one says uh let's
go and build the data warehouse using
SQL server. So they start
uh uh they start
building their projects using completely
different tools. So each one of them
going to have different tool. So not
only the storage by the way, it's as
well how they process the data. So each
one of them as well going to go and
check the market. Okay.
Um let's just take this one here. I'm
going to use talent for example in order
to process the data. The other one going
to use another tool. Yeah. And uh each
of those teams going to start you
processing the data using different
teams uh different tools like
Informatica Talent. the other one can
use maybe data factory and stuff like
that. So they all have their own
pipelines and of course um data
visualizations. Now thanks god we have
PowerBI and Tableau because before
PowerBI and Tableau there were a lot of
tools that are used but it's somehow
PowerBI and Tableau they managed to
reduce the number of tools to only two
but still it's not clear what is better
really PowerBI or Tableau. uh but I can
tell you um two is better than 10. Okay.
So each one of those two teams start as
well having their their own uh uh
front-end tools and like I'm just
showing you small picture. Okay. So
imagine how big the companies are and
each team each department need to see
some numbers they need to see uh like um
yeah they have their key metrics and
they need a team in order to bring those
metrics from the sources. So it was to
total cows and I was one of those teams.
Okay. I worked before uh using an SQL
server as the ETL tool. I used um uh
talent that's why Mercedes-Benz did hire
me because I was talent expert and I use
Tableau and uh in the whole company they
have different tools. Not only the tools
are different, not only the storage are
different, it's as well the policies are
different between those people. So
[snorts] for example if you come to my
projects if I am let's say uh if I am
okay with the data security people I
might give you all the data but the
other one they might say you know what
I'm not going I'm not going to give you
an access to all the data I will give
you only access to only few rows. So
each one of us starts defining different
um uh policies on order on how to access
the data and that was a nightmare
because it really depends on the humans
that are running the project and as well
the security and how you understand the
security. So that's why we had like
different technology, different policies
and the same data as well might be
around but we don't know about it. Like
for example I you know I can give an
example if we are having the customer's
data the customer's data might be as
well in different projects but we don't
know about it like maybe this team got
an excel with all customers data and
they store it inside their system. So if
you come as a manager in the platform uh
sorry in the company or you want to do
some data governance it's going to be
almost impossible because uh the data is
all spreaded around there is no uh let's
say unified or let's say there is no one
click uh one uh overview of the data I
don't know where are the customers data
they are everywhere we try to manage it
of course but it is nightmare this is
all let's say before uh using a platform
And data bricks now promise us they say
uh you know what uh you can
use my platform you can use my tool and
uh let me just make this everything
smaller.
So
um datab brick says you know what you
don't need the whole thing just build
one data layer. So,
uh, let me just try to here, right? Data
layer or let's say we're going to call
it, um,
delta
lake. Build one layer of data.
So, put everything that you have in the
company in this layer. And after that,
go and define the policies. So, after
that, we're going to define the policies
using something called the Unity
catalog.
So, you define the policies only once.
If you say for example the customer's
data goes only for this department then
you define only once and and then bring
everyone from the company and they start
doing their use cases. I think they are
the data analysts so sorry for that and
then bring everyone else
data analysts
and uh bring the business users the
standard users. So we're not going to
give now titles or stuff. Bring everyone
to this platform.
That engineer is going to build this and
uh do the use cases. So whether you have
like a PowerBI report, you have an AI,
you have um yeah machine learning use
case, just put all your use cases here.
So I'm just going to put it here. So use
case one, use case two, anything about
the data, it's going to be on top of
this of those two layers. If you do it
like this then
um they let's say they're going to say
um yeah everything going to be fine. Now
I've seen this transition before. So I
was on the left side and me myself
before 5 years we moved to this and I
can tell you it's yeah the tools always
the platforms always like uh uh promise
you um uh let's say that they going to
solve all the issues but all it's always
about the mindsets of people that are
building this platform that are using
the tool. If you are let's say a bad
data engineer or let's say you have a
not skilled team or you don't have the
right mindset you still can make weird
things inside the data layer and the and
the policies and stuff. So yes, data
bricks kind of makes it easier for you
to build this vision. But uh we need as
well the right people in order to to
make it. But things are better now. Like
after 5 years I checked how things are
working. It's like no one anymore
talking about um pipelines about for
example talent uh Informatica about the
different tools. This is really the old
the old words at least where I worked.
So this is really an old word and no one
anymore is discussing should I use an
Oracle for data analytics, should I use
um Cognos, should I use um um SQL server
or anything? No, we are all now at the
one platform and we are all using um um
data bricks and this makes this is a
great idea because you know what like if
the manager is going to say see this
picture they're going to be very happy
about it because they don't have to deal
with all those tools and licenses and
you need way more data engineers and
more people building those projects. So
this reduce the number of data
engineers. This makes it uh unified like
for example if they going to train the
company about one tool they going to
send them and say okay learn data bricks
they will not send them to learn like
100 tools. So things looks easier and I
believe things are way easier than
before but still it is not clean not not
really good on how we build those data
products.
So now that's why I just wanted to tell
you this is what data bricks uh try to
sell. Let's say if you go to the
presentations I believe it is 50/50 true
it's always depends on the people that
are building the projects but still it
is way better than the old words. Okay.
Now that's why a lot of companies now
they dream of this. They want to build
this because they know how expensive the
old words. That's why a lot of people
now are moving to the data bricks and
they are learning those tools. I'm sure
one day we will not have data bricks. We
going to have another tool uh that is
[snorts] uh maybe going to be hype.
Okay. It's not about the tools, it's
about the idea. But this is one step
into uh making things uh easier and uh
of course you as a data analyst you can
use a powerbi maybe in order to do some
data analytics on the platform. So this
is let's say from technology perspective
why we are um sorry the previous one
yeah so this is from technology
perspective why data bricks exists and
this is from the other side like let's
say company why the companies are moving
to data bricks okay um so so this is so
far about this now I'm going to tell you
how we use data bricks in real projects
so I have you some icons.
I hope that is uh all clear for you
guys.
Um so now the how we build usually data
bricks and uh what are the different
rules.
Let me just go this mode and start
explaining it. So now in companies
mostly mostly most of the data are
databases. Okay. Uh this depends on how
advanced the company is. Um but um some
companies are pushing on using Kafka. So
that's why um um now like at the start I
used a lot of databases but now recently
I noticed a lot of sources are providing
data in Kafka because this makes life
easier for everyone for the data that is
produced and for me as a consumer. So uh
this is one thing that um it is very
important uh to to learn as a data
engineer. um your data could be in a
file server, it could be in the internet
or maybe you can get it from API. So now
and we have on the right side consumers
and use cases and a lot of people want
to use the data. [snorts] So now the
first thing that's going to happen is
that they're going to bring you data
engineer and can I tell you okay you're
going to get an empty data bricks. So
this is data bricks this is you data
engineer [laughter]
go [snorts] build for me the platform.
So uh so this is the heavy lifting to be
honest this is unfair.
So we [clears throat] d that engineers
we get the empty data bricks and we need
to build a data product. Okay. So uh
what happens is that um you're going to
like data bricks gives us some reference
on how to build uh such a data system to
say you know what uh build something
called data lakehouse. I'm going to go
in deep details about data lake house
tomorrow because now I'm trying to make
it uh let's say uh um more focused for
data analysts. So now what's going to
happen you as a data engineer you're
going to make three layers. So you're
going to make something called bronze
layer silver and gold.
Now it's called the medelian
architecture and let me just give it the
names here. Bronze.
Now here we have the silver
and then the gold. Okay.
So those are your three layers. And why
we have three layers? It's because it is
separations of concerns. It is easier
for us to manage three different
purposes than just put everything in one
place. Now we will not go in a lot of
details. What going to happen that
you're going to go and pull the data
from wherever the data come from. You're
going to go and build your pipeline
to load those three layers. And
um what else? Of course, you will be
configuring uh everything in the uh the
Unity catalog.
And again, I will not go in details.
You're going to understand those stuff
maybe starting from tomorrow. And uh
you're going to build the data
lakehouse. My friends, this is our job.
This is all what we do.
Uh let me just put everything here so
that's it looks nice.
Okay. So
you're going to build this data lake
house.
So
sorry about the colors. I am picky a
little bit. Okay. So this is all what
you do as a data engineer. And this is
of course very hard. It's not that that
easy to do this because it involves a
lot of data processing, data
transformations, understanding how to
module the data and stuff like that. But
this is your word. This is what you're
going to do as data engineer and you can
do the whole thing just data bricks. So
you don't need any other tools. You
don't need a storage. You don't need uh
let's say to go and get a database I
don't know from Oracle Bosch. You don't
need anything. You can do the whole
thing, the pipelining, the automations,
the uh the uh the definition of the
policies, everything in one single tool
and this is amazing. Um I like I spent
the last five years only opening this
only that bricks as data engineer. Okay,
so no other tools which is before I used
to open at least six seven tools in
order to do this. So now um this is your
main job to build this and of course
everything ends for you as that engineer
as you build the final layer. So the
gold layer is the final product that you
come and say you know what I have now
all the data ready everything is
prepared and now I have something called
data product and you start using it
um you start using it uh for analytics.
So now comes the um use cases and here
we have a lot of people are interested
in your data. So you're going to have
standard users, you're going to have
data scientists, you have power users.
So you're going to have a lot of people
and I missed here of course the data
analysts.
So data analysts.
So now uh as a data analyst or let's say
someone want to do a use case um you're
going to go and access the gold layer
and there are a lot of options on how to
do this. Now one very I'm going to say
um easy way or let's say standard way is
just to use a new tool or let's say not
data bricks tool you're going to go and
you build something called standard
reports using powerp.
So this is our favorite thing that we do
and uh this is something that I think
many of you did already learn how to do
this. So what we're going to do we're
going to go and uh connect
um yeah the gold layer or start
consuming the data from gold layer start
building standard dashboards for our
users and then comes those standard
users. When I say standard user, it is
just a user that can click. Okay, it's
not someone that can do any big things.
So you build the yeah let's say the
standard reports for them or maybe for
you even depends on the use case and you
offer it as a solution for standard
users. But this is not the only thing
that we can do with data. This is one of
the things but of course this is
something that something that we do a
lot. Okay, we build standard reports.
Now another thing that actually actually
you have to do as a data analyst you
have to do something called data
exploration. You have to explore the
data.
Yeah. And now I'm going to tell you uh
you don't have to do it in PowerBI
because you have of course you can do it
in PowerBI but we have now better
solution. You can use as well data
bricks to explore the data. So this is
usually that exploration.
It is something that you do for
yourself. So it's not that you are going
to offer the data later to someone else.
You are just exploring the data. You
want to understand the context. You have
to understand uh like um what is inside
this data lakehouse because you cannot
jump immediately and start building
dashboards without understanding the
content. So that means actually as data
analysts this is the last thing that you
can do is you build a report in PowerBI
but before building PowerBI reports you
have to do a lot of investigation and
exploration and this time you will not
do this anymore using PowerBI you have
to do this now or let's say you can do
this now using the data bricks and
[snorts] there are many options on how
to do it like um for example
uh you can use um notebooks. I'm going
to show you of course all those stuff
you [clears throat] either you can use
your notebook in order to do it in case
you want to work with Python and SQL or
you can just use an SQL editor as well
inside data bricks.
So this is a second solution for you in
order to explore the data and work with
the data and actually you are as well
always using the same data. So we are
always going to the same single point of
truth. We are not going to take our own
copy and put it somewhere. Okay, we are
always using we are the same gold layer.
So now you can explore the data and
since it is an SQL editor, you're going
to notice as well that some of your
standard users going to say, you know
what, I learned SQL maybe using my
course [laughter]
and I have some skills in SQL. this
PowerBI report that you are building for
me, it's not something that I really
want. I want to go as well and play with
you inside the data. So that's why some
of those standard users going to be a
power user. It's it's like a user that's
has let's say SQL skills and going to
say you know what I'm going to work with
you on exploring the data because
uh the reports are making no sense
currently. So that's why at this level
we can say not only the data analyst
even the business users if they have SQL
skills they can start exploring the big
data the data lake house and um one more
thing that you can do as well actually
you can explore the data or build
something called dashboards so not only
in powerbi you do uh dashboarding you
can as well do dashboarding here so but
I'm going to say dashboard boarding in
data bricks is different than
dashboarding in powerbi.
So let me just make it like this.
The dashboarding in I'm going to say
like like this. It is not the final
product of your dashboard because if you
go through like a project and you start
building PowerBI reports, you're going
to understand okay there is like
multiple versions of your dashboard.
There is a dashboard where you are
exploring the data and understanding
maybe how I'm going to present the data,
whether the data makes sense and stuff
like that. And there is a final let's
say pixel perfect dashboard that you can
present to your standard users. So
that's why actually it is totally
possible to do dashboarding in data
bricks and to say you know what I'm
going to explore things first inside the
data bricks. I'm going to build let's
say a rough plan on the project using
the dashboard inside data bricks and
only after we agree all together this is
something correct the data makes sense
someone going to go and build it in
powerbi okay so that's why dashboarding
it is as well possible here and now um
yeah the data scientist let me just uh
put it here because we will not we are
not focusing on this you can do machine
learning
uh as well as a data scientist test uh
using the same data of course but now
something yeah I'm going to say this is
since the middle of last year the
standard users now actually get they can
as well interact with this data lake
house but not using SQL of course not
using dashboards but my friends let me
just search do I have something I don't
have okay I wanted an icon for AI let me
search for an AI Maybe I'm going to find
something here. Yeah. So, forget about
it. So, they going to use uh prompts
like Shajd, let's say, in order to
interact with the data. So, they're
going to use the natural language in
order to speak to the data inside the
code layer. So actually not only they
wait for the PowerBI reports those users
that has no idea how to use Python or
SQL or PowerBI they can start
interacting with the data using AI. I
believe we are not there yet because
you still has to I'm going to show you
the AI in the inside data brick. You
should still have some basic
understanding of SQL to understand
whether everything is fine. But I tried
this out with with few standard users.
It worked but in many cases it didn't
work. So that's why I'm going to say I
think we should wait a little bit for
the standard users. But there is
possibility now to talk to the data.
It's something you don't need to build
PowerBI. You don't have to use Python
SQL. You just go and have a shot with
your data. And this is now what they are
pushing to it. Now, if I look at this
like uh as a big picture on data bricks,
um I'm going to say this is like
something that I didn't dream of because
working in big data projects like this,
it is only for experts. It's only for
people that have heavy scripting. They
know what's like how to configure the
clusters and stuff. And even for a data
analyst, it was not something that you
can go and start interacting with with
this box over here. Maximum maybe the
data engineer going to give you an extra
database. Let's say going to put the
data inside it in order for you to work
with the PowerBI. So the whole thing the
data leaks before it was only for data
engineers. It's only for them like no
one gonna going to access it. It's only
for you. you build it and then you start
sharing different products using SQL and
databases. But now we don't do that
anymore because we going to offer the
data for multiple use cases and everyone
now able to interact with such a
platform where you have um yeah
multipprocessing and scalable systems.
So um yeah I think this is crazy from my
perspective [laughter] and uh yeah uh
that's why as well uh why data bricks is
now uh something very widely used or
getting a lot of attention. So now for
you as data analysts as you can see you
have different ways on how to work with
this tool. For data engineers it is very
clear I'm going to prepare the data from
left to right. But for you as data
analyst you have different ways. You can
jump immediately to PowerBI. You can
skip the whole PowerBI thing. You say
you know what I will not use PowerBI at
all. I'm going to stay inside this uh
platform and just do uh those stuff. So
now um this is maybe gives you a little
bit uh big picture on how we work on
this. Um I lived the whole process end
to end. So um I have built this it took
me around yeah I'm going to say 3 years
in order to have very solid um uh data
products. But uh as I started using the
platform datab bricks it was like at the
start as well doesn't have all those
tools. All those tools are something new
like uh the dashboarding the AI um um um
the unity catalog all those stuff are
very new it's only 2 three years years
old it's not something like uh existed
long time ago uh what existed long time
ago is how to use data bricks to uh
let's say to use the compute and storage
to build those three layers but those
use cases it's only something new that's
why now even for data analyst it is very
um uh let's say
um relevant for you to use this
platform. So now
um yeah this is the big picture and this
is what we're going to do. I'm going to
take you into step by step on how we do
those stuff inside um uh data bricks. So
now uh let me just go outside
look at this second.
All right. So, let me just check the
plan. Where are we so far?
So, now I'm going to say we covered from
one machine to data bricks. I explained
for you why we have it um yeah from
company's perspective and uh data bricks
in a real company's workflow. We talked
about it as well. So, now um I'm going
to take you into to the tool. So, I
talked a lot about it. By the way, I'm
going to go and share those stuff with
you. So you're going to get an access to
this uh what I'm drawing. And now um
yeah, let's go to datab bricks and start
checking the interface.
Uh the first thing um you can find of
course uh the links in the notion or you
just like search for it datab bricks
free edition. Uh you're going to sign up
for the free edition and if they ask you
whether you're going to use it for
personal or for work, it depends. Like
for me since this is a work I'm going to
use the the uh the let's say the
enterprise edition so I'm going to pay
for it but for you as you start learning
data bricks and only for learning
perspective uh it is totally free for
you but if you go and you start using it
in order to sell a course or maybe for
your work at the company you are not
allowed to use the free edition. Uh but
for you this is free. Before like few
like one year ago it uh costed money to
do this because they were like a
community edition. It was uh pretty uh
bad let's say missing a lot of features
and uh and most of the students went and
start using data bricks where they paid
um paid money for it but now it's free.
So congrats really I'm happy about it
because this going to cost you some
hundred uh dollars. Yeah, in a month. Uh
but uh starting from now, it is free
edition for you because um will not cost
you anything. And yeah, let me just say
something. I I want to still motivate
you about to learn this. You guys are
all learning Excel. You are guys are
learning PowerBI and you the job market
is horrible now. It's really horrible to
find a job. But you can do it of course.
But now if you go and say, you know
what, I have knowledge about data
bricks. I know how to analyze your data
in big scale using cloud and stuff like
that. It's going to be really a big
addition for you and everything for
free. So, uh and that's why I'm trying
now to give you this uh demo as well to
be as well for free for you. So, there's
no for you um blocker at all to start
learning those technologies. Uh and it
can open your perspective on how
scalable or let's say big companies
works. Okay. So, I really recommend you
to do that. It is not that hard. And uh
yeah just go and get your free edition.
If you don't I'm not saying that you
have to do it now. You can do it after
the session. But I'm saying uh register
there here um if you are just training
then just go and use it for personal
uses. If you want to sell something or
you want to analyze your company's data
then you have my friends to buy it.
Okay. Now
uh I'm going to take you to the
interface. Um
if you yeah logged in it's going to be
looking like this. Okay. Now um the free
edition has some tutorials for you and
some let's say nicer start up uh for
you. But now since I'm using the uh
let's say the premium edition it's going
to be like this at the start. Now uh
first of all as you saw
uh this is a web browser. So now I am at
a website link. Okay. So I don't have to
install anything. This is amazing. I
don't have to I can work with very bad
PC, very bad laptop and do big data
things. So you don't have to install
anything. It is just a URL over here.
You go inside and everything happens in
the cloud. Okay, maybe this is something
that I didn't mention. [snorts] Uh datab
bricks in the background. they are using
um virtual machines uh and and storage
and stuff completely from um AWS and uh
Azure. Okay. So that means they will not
use your computing power. They will not
using the the storage that you have in
your PC and [snorts]
uh yeah it's going to be free for you.
So now this is the interface. So I am
now inside data bricks guys. Um
the thing is the UI changes a lot but
still the same ideas. Okay. So maybe
after a month or I don't know maybe a
year you're going to find some different
icons. Maybe they're going to change few
names but it always stays the same. Now
if you go in data bras you have first to
keep your eye on the left side. The left
side is the most important thing. Okay.
So now on the left side there are a lot
of things and uh it might get you
overwhelmed at the start. Okay, because
you're going to find here, I don't know,
workspaces, recent catalog, SQL stuff,
data engineering, AI,
and like a lot of stuff. So, this might
confuse you at the start. Now, if you
are a data analyst, you have to keep
your eye on one section that is very
important, the SQL section. All those
tools in the SQL, it is something for
you, for you as that analyst. So,
there's no way around it. all those
stuff you can use it and you can try
those out. So the whole SQL section is
for you. Now about the first side here
I'm going to say the most important
thing here is the catalog and the
compute. Okay. So now um I'm going to
say let's go to the catalog.
So um it's of course the first question
that we always ask ourself where is the
data in each platform. If you go to
powerbi or excel and something like that
the first question you can say okay
before I play with the data I need the
data itself. So um in data bricks they
call it unity catalog or they call it
catalog and uh they present the data in
um in in in a way that looks like a
database. So it's if you worked before
with SQL server maybe with process SQL
it's going to be very familiar for you.
So the catalog it's where your data is.
It looks like a database but it is not a
database. It's very important to
understand this is not a real database.
Okay. There is no uh database management
system running uh this over here. Okay.
And um yeah so the catalog is important.
The other thing is the compute.
Now in the free edition
um there is only one um let's say one
compute for you one server for you that
you're going to use because they don't
want you to create any new servers and
stuff then the free edition going to
cost a lot of money so because each yeah
each compute it is like virtual machine
from Microsoft and if you make it scaled
like to a large compute it's going to
cost a lot that's why they don't allow
you to create let's say high-end uh
clusters or computes they're going to
allow you to have only one so you need
storage always and as well the compute
now about the catalog let's go back to
the catalog I'm going to tell you
something here
uh there is yeah I have to go back
[laughter]
to show you an image so just a second
um
this is relevant for you as Um,
let me see what where I put it.
Oh yeah. Yeah, here. So
now this is relevant for both of you
guys that engineers and data analysts. I
would just to let you understand what is
going on. Now
uh in databases um
the data always stores in files. Okay,
like generic concepts
uh there is always files and in
databases like SQL server or rack
posress the files of the databases are
not for you. You are not the one pro
like can go inside and start working
with the database file. They say it's
going to be closed file and only my
engine the Oracle angel or the SQL
server engine only my engine can
interact with those files. So they are
closed files if you are working with
database. But now in data links like
data bricks the files are having an open
format called parquet. So the open
format file it is something that is say
you know what we will not be like the
databases where everything is closed and
locked and you cannot let's say use the
data. We're going to have an open file
format where everyone is welcome to use
the data. So that's why we have
something called market files and um in
the background everything going to be
stored inside a blob storage in the
cloud. This is a bigger like let's say a
term that is used in cloud and um yeah
it's like just a container of files. So
you can put inside it anything. You can
put an image. You can put a CSV file and
uh the standard way on uh uh using files
in datab bricks called delta tables or
delta files. They are bracket files but
with some uh let's say uh some extra
logs and transactions like extra add-ons
but it is an open file that actually you
can use it for any purpose. You can use
it in datab bricks you can use it
outside datab bricks. So it is something
that is open and you can use it and now
2 years ago you have as a data analyst
to deal with those files. Okay. Because
um it is it was the way how you work
with uh Azure and how you work with data
bricks. Everyone has to learn how to
work with the delta files and how to uh
to read the data from file. So everyone
like even as a data analyst you couldn't
able to went to go immediately to SQL
and start using it. you should start
using some Python code. But now things
changed as they said, you know what,
this is still very hard for people like
only experts can deal with this. That's
why let's make a something that's
everyone knows
um something looks like a database. So
they build something called Unity
catalog on top of it or let's say meta
store that makes it looks like a
database for you and database everyone
can use it. So they as you know in
database systems there are always
hierarchy on how you def how you find
your data or how to organize the
company's data though in data bricks
they start with a meta store and then
you have something called cataloges yeah
let me just use this here laser so it
start with the uh meta store this is the
highest node this is the company yeah so
I'm going to say this is my company and
then you can build different catalog
logs in data bricks you can say okay for
the sales I'm going to have catalog for
the development another catalog for the
production maybe for the HR another
catalog so for each projects for each
big thing uh we can uh create a new
catalog and now of course inside each
projects depends on your design like you
can go and start building different
schemas so I can say okay in my project
I'm going to go and adopt the bronze
silver gold so I'm going to go and
create schemas
So far it is everything is logical like
everything is just organized data it's
nothing like you don't see data inside
catalog you don't see data inside
schemas or it's just how you organize
the company okay and now
um inside the schema things gets
interesting you can build a table this
is I think everyone of you knows SQL
table like you have rows and columns and
stuff or you can build a view on top of
it or you can build something called the
volume. A volume it is just like yeah a
folder folder that's looks like blob
storage where you can put data that is
not ready to have the table shape. Not
all data have columns and rows right you
have some JSON files maybe an image a
video whatever so you cannot put
everything as a table and view that's
why you have the volume and it is just
um yeah a folder container where you can
put all those stuff inside it and then
there is something called functions it's
some advanced things it's in case you
want to build some automatic filters or
you are building some role level
security and stuff like that now this is
the main idea of the Unity catalog in
data bricks. It is just a way on how to
organize the data and to hide the
complexity behind data bricks. So you
don't have anymore as data analyst to
understand all those stuff but as a data
engineer you have to learn how to
process a delta file, how to process how
to load into delta files. This is
something that we still have to deal
with but it is way easier than before.
As that analyst you don't have to
understand the whole technology.
Um yeah so this is exactly what I'm
trying here to show you.
Um this is again the catalog I'm here
and let me see here. So now we have
workspaces. So um no it's let's start
from the top my organization. So this is
my big company over here and then below
it we're going to have a workspace for
each projects. So for par project we're
going to build one. For your project
we're going to build one. So each one of
us going to get a project. Inside it
we're going to have schemas. So here
maybe I'm going to go and put the
silver. I'm going to put the bronze, the
gold and stuff like that. And then
inside it, if you drill down, you're
going to find the tables or the views or
the volumes. So now everything is empty
if you started with data bricks because
you don't have any data. And that's why
we're going to change that. We're going
to go and upload data to it. I will show
you in a minute. But I just wanted to
understand what is a Unity catalog.
Okay.
All right. So now um this is the
catalog. Now about the compute.
So I'm going to go to the SQL warehouse
or to the compute. Now there is two
things in about the compute and data
bricks. I'm going to of course go and
show you an image. Cannot stop jumping
back to here. So about the compute it is
very complex topic. Still still it's
complex topic but it's way better than
before. Okay. Now database compute
splits into two sections.
A cluster. So let me just go and uh grab
here few things. So if you are a data
engineer
you have to understand everything behind
the clusters. Cluster is for you. So a
cluster it is something that I'm going
to be building in order to configure how
to process my data and usually I do
everything using pi spark and python and
I have to um I have a lot of details to
prepare maybe some libraries maybe some
installations. So the clusters are
something advanced in order to do data
engineering or to do of course data
science. Yeah. So if you are a data
engineer, data science, you have to go
with the cluster way. But if you are a
data analyst, my friend, you have a nice
life because you will be using the SQL
warehouse. SQL warehouse, it is as well
a cluster compute, but it is made really
easy that you can configure it very
simple. So you just have to say the size
like the t-shirt size S, XS, medium,
large, X large. So it's just you
configure the the the the yeah how big
is this warehouse and actually who can
access this warehouse and that's it. So
actually it is totally optimized totally
prepared for you to reduce the whole
complexity of the whole thing below it.
So you don't have to understand anything
over here. You just define the size of
your warehouse and and start using it.
And as a data engineer, you're going to
be using cluster. And there there will
be a lot of options. But sadly in the
free editions, uh we are allowed all to
use only the warehouse. Okay. So you
cannot configure any clusters. It's
going to be um something that I think
you have to go to the premium and start
paying and configuring your Azure and
stuff like that. So it is not easy to
learn all those stuff as a data
engineer. But as data analyst, you don't
have to deal with this. There's
something called warehouse and this
warehouse is uh is a cluster powerful
cluster and you decide the size of it.
Now there is like two ways or let's say
two types in each there is a serverless
and there is something that you manage.
So a serverless just to let you
understand um I have a picture here. No
I don't have a picture. So now behind
each of those clusters let me go back
here. Okay, so we are at the SQL
warehouse. This serverless warehouse, it
is something that starts immediately and
always online. Let's say
um you can use it immediately. Now the
old way of using warehouses, it was you
have to spin up, you have to start the
cluster or the warehouse, you have to
wait 10 minutes until data bricks starts
the Azure virtual machines and stuff. So
it is a process that took a lot of time
let's say [clears throat] 10 minutes to
start and as well um uh let's say about
the speed it was something that yeah um
not that not that fast that's why now we
have something called serverless
serverless is always online and you pay
for let's say for only if you use the
data so like before without serverless
you have like I cannot create tier one I
have only serverless is uh once I click
start so as you can see here there's a
start button
so start this warehouse it's going to
start now once I click start I start
paying for the whole infrastructure for
Microsoft and datab bricks but now I
click start but I'm not paying anything
because I'm not using the platform I'm
not using any data so it is always
online and only if I start using the
data and start processing the data I
will start paying for the service so
that's why the server serverless. It is
something as were introduced last year.
It um it is a type of a warehouse that
is always online and it is fair to use
because before you have paid for
resources without using it, okay,
because you just started it. So, uh the
serverless you're going to find it in
compute and as well in the warehouse.
So, now as a data analyst, you usually
don't have to go to over here to the
compute.
you always go to the SQL and you find
the SQL warehouse and you start it. Now
each one of you once you create the
accounts you're going to get this
serverless uh account and uh you can
start as you can see it is small. So um
uh I cannot go and make it larger but
there's one thing that is cool here guys
in the since we are at the cloud and we
are doing a project in the cloud. Now
this something happens a lot like if I
am working if I start my day and I start
working in building a dashboard or let's
say working with the data I always use a
small one small server okay but now
let's say that I have presentation day
and I have to show a very important
analyzis to my manager to stakeholder so
I am in a meeting like now and I want to
start uh uh presenting the results in
this day I go and make it large in case
to make things faster and to make things
smooth. Okay, so this is something like
you didn't dream on the onrem before in
the cloud. You can always uh scale up
like make everything very fast to have
an amazing um an amazing presentation
and then scale down everything so that
you don't pay a lot of money. And this
is something guys like it was a dream
before. So now as you can see here I
think because I have the premium edition
or something like that as you can see it
is very simple to configure. Look at
this. Um I have to say whether it's
small um or or medium large excel and
stuff. If you go to the uh large over
here then I think I'm going to pay a lot
of money. So actually I have to go and
make it small
and you just decide you know what
whether it's going to shut down after 10
minutes or something like that. This is
this is joke. Okay. So this is really
easy. Now um about the def um the
cluster informations. Yeah. So actually
that's it. It's simple. But I cannot
show you how data engineers do the
compute because actually I should have
connected data bricks to Azure and stuff
like that. But you as a data analyst you
don't have to deal with this. So now
this is the most important thing is
always the storage and the compute.
Okay. So once you know where to find
those two, make sure that this is
online. Okay? So always start the
serverless and if this is green then
everything is running. If not then
you're going to get errors and it will
not work. So those are the two things.
Now of course uh the question is how to
work with the data. Let me check how
late is it. So let's do as well 10
minutes and then I'm going to do a break
so that I um can take some fresh air. So
I hope that makes sense so far guys. So
I hope that is something that um makes
sense. I try to make things are clear
for you um like datal analysts and
engineers and and um even if you are
total beginner because I don't know uh
let's say where are you in your career
maybe you are just a simple I don't know
PowerBI user or an Excel user but I'm
trying to make it as simple as possible.
Of course, if the session is very small,
I'm going to ask you like where you can
like let's say whether you are engineer
and analyst and go deeper. Yeah. So
that's why I'm trying now to balance
think between showing you how data
bricks works and then the other side try
to make my language like easy for you.
So now
uh what else I have to show you? Of
course um if you go to the catalog over
here, it is empty guys, right? So we
don't have anything here. uh if you go
to the default default is always like in
any databases you will have a default
schema and it is an empty so now I'm
going to show you two ways on how to
upload data so he be careful on how to
do this and um understand how we going
to do it so now you have always to
understand where the data going to land
going to land okay whether it's going to
go to the default or it's going to go to
the new schema so once you upload data
you should know where the data is going
Okay. So now I have a workspace. I have
a default inside it. And now I can go
and put data inside this default. Or you
say, you know what, I'm going to go and
make my own schema. And this is what I
recommend you to do just to learn how to
do it. So make sure always to click on
the right level and you say go and
create schema. I'm going to call it for
example here
uh sales
sales uh DB.
It's a new location. Or if you don't
want to want to do that of course you
can use the default. So now as you can
see I have now something called sales
DB. So now this is a new schema and as
well empty. So everything is empty. And
now we can start uh putting data inside
it. And here comes something really
important to understand. Um
once you start using the project in um
yeah in real projects you don't manually
upload data to data bricks. We don't do
that. Okay, it is just for data analysts
in order to do quick exploration. But we
as data engineers, we never upload data
like the way I'm going to show you. So
I'm going to show you now a method that
you do to explore data or maybe just to
practice with data bricks. We as data
engineers, we connect the data using the
networking and the codes and everything
that you have in data bricks in order to
build automated pipelines from the
sources. We don't upload the data
manually to data bricks but now we're
going to do it manually so that you
practice and as well in the free edition
you cannot go and build those pipelines
automatically from the sources. So
that's why as long as you are using this
platform now we upload data manually. We
don't do anything automatically. And if
you want to practice as a data engineer
let's say uh if you want to practice uh
building an automated pipeline from the
sources then again you have to buy the
full edition but I believe it is
unnecessary you don't have to train now
on how to do things from sources you
have to learn the tool you have to learn
the platform that's why it is totally
okay if you as a training phase as you
are learning the platform is to just
upload things manually
So now we're going to do there's two
ways to do it. There is uh let's say a
hard way and easy way.
Um let's say I'm going to go and click
on the new. So
and you're going to see here the first
button you says um add or upload data.
So I'm going to go and click on it. And
here you have three options. Okay. The
first option is to say create for me a
table. So again what is a table? Let me
just go over here.
So you say I want you to create a table.
I want to create this over here.
This is the first option. The second
option you say the second opt option you
say I want to uphload files into a
volume. So that means where is it? Here.
So I'm going to use the volume. I don't
have data that is ready to be as a
table. So I have an image. I have
something maybe CSV as well. It's fine
but I want to upload to a folder not to
a table. So this is the second option. A
third option where you use the
connectors. Yeah. Like for example you
can use the fiverron in order to load
data from Google drive or I don't know
there's a lot of tools. We don't use
this in real projects. Okay. this five
strong I think it is crabby tool but we
we don't do this in real project but you
can to practice go and connect your data
from one drive from google drive it's
just you have to create an account it's
free as well so you can create a free
account and you can start using the data
that is available in those platforms but
in real projects the data engineers
should do real automations and they
don't do this this so for now you have
those three options I'm going to say
we're going to do and try two of them.
So I will start with a volume. So how to
up to upload to a volume. Um the first
thing again we're going to go and I
think I have to create a volume first.
So let me go back to the catalog
and go to the sales DB.
Let me check. Yeah over here. Okay. So
now again I am in wire workspace. I am
in the catalog the sales DB. The first
step if we is to go and create a volume.
So you click on your schema and then you
go to create and then volume. Once you
click on it, it's just you are let's say
you are creating a folder at your PC.
It's not crazy thing. Yeah. So I I'm
just going to call it I don't know uh my
data or something. So my data.
So here either you're going to use the
unity catalog from datab bricks or
external volumes if in case if you want
to do something external in Azure or
AWS. I'm going to say we stay with the
data bricks. We will not go and use any
other cloud provider. And make sure that
you are on the right workspace and the
correct schema. So here if you go inside
you're going to find the default and the
sales DB. So make sure you are in the
correct place and create the volume.
Now, as you can see, I'm going to have
here a folder. You can see it's very
simple. So, it is where is it? It is a
folder and in the cloud. Okay. So,
that's all about the volume and you can
put inside it whatever you want. So,
again, you can put uh images, you can
put uh your videos, [laughter] you can
put whatever you want inside it. Now, in
order to upload things, we're going to
go click here on the upload to this
volume or to the new. I'm going to go to
the new um upload data then volume and
then I just have to find my data.
So so
second
I prepared something here.
So now uh by the way about the files uh
I prepared two folders in inside the
data sets. You can find them in the
GitHub or if you go to the download uh
link. So if you go to the um analytics,
you're going to find two data sets, the
sales data sets where you have two
dimensions and one fact and another one
you can find the HR data sets. So here
we have like one big data set that I use
in order to build PowerBI HR dashboard.
So you can use whatever you want. I'm
going to go and you know what I'm going
to go and upload everything from the
sales. So if I just drag and drop
and actually that's it. So but I have to
define where this should go. So check
the destination over here. You're going
to say to the um sales DB and to my
data. So that's it. You define the path.
Always keep your eye once you upload
something where the data going to land.
Otherwise you're going to upload it and
you will never find it. Okay? So this is
always keep in mind uh in order to see
your data you have always to check the
destination. So I have everything ready.
I'm going to say upload.
And now as you can see it is uh working.
Now in order to check we're going to go
to the workspace uh sorry to the catalog
and then to the workspace sales DB my
data. And look at this. I have now my
CSV files. So as you as you can see as
you are like uploading files to your
Google drive or whatever as you can see
now my data is here. Now um of course
the question is how to query the data.
So we have the data uh over here. Um one
thing that you can do is to go to the
workspaces over here and you can go and
create something called notebook.
Just a second.
So now um I'm going to tell you all the
details after the break about the
notebooks. So don't worry about it. I
just want to show you how we're going to
query the data. So I am inside the
notebook. I can write here Python or
SQL. Now on the left side I still see my
data and all what you have to do is to
write actually an SQL query or if you
don't want to do it in the notebook you
can go and to the SQL editor as well.
It's going to be the same thing. So
you're going to go and create a new
query.
It's like you are inside database and
you're going to start saying select star
from and then
you go to their volume
and say for example the data yeah the
customers
and I think we have to put before it CSV
so CSV dots
and then I'm going to run it.
Um it's always going to ask you about um
yeah which compute going to be used in
order to run the query. We have only
one. So we're going to have only one.
I'm going to say start attach and run.
So now it's going to start the server
and it should now run my query. As you
can see uh you're going to see the
status over here. So it say waiting and
here you see it is green. That means the
server is online. And it's always like
this. Your first query might take some
time in order to spin the cluster and
spin things. Now look at this. I able
now to query the CSV file. But again
very important to understand we are not
using the technology of the data bricks
yet. We are not using really the delta
files. We are just having a CSV file
inside storage and we are querying the
data. So we are not using the full
benefit of data bricks. Okay. It is just
a CSV file. I'm just reading it and I
can use SQL in order to create the data.
But this is actually a bad way on how to
work with your data inside data bricks.
We should work all with with
a delta table a table not a volume.
Volume is something not prepared. It's
something not clear. That's why we will
I don't recommend you to work with like
this using um volumes. Instead, we want
to create a table and creating table is
as well something very easy. We're going
to go to new then add and then this time
we're going to say create or modify
table. This is way better and as well uh
safer. So I'm going to go and but here I
can only grab one table at a time. So
I'm going to take the customers.
Now again you are uploading files. Look
where you are uploading. So by default
as you can see I am at the workspace the
schema default and I don't want it here.
I'm going to want it in the sales DB and
the table name could stay like customers
like this. I have preview of the data.
And once I click create
now databicks is doing a lot of things.
is creating the table is creating a
delta files and storing everything
inside delta files and market files. But
for you, you will not see all those
stuff. You're going to see now if you go
to the catalog uh inside your new
schema, there is a new table called um
uh customers and now you have a lot of
details about this table like compared
to the volume. The volume is just CSV.
So now what we have done we just created
a table which is something amazing. We
created this one using the delta
technology the open file and now the
full um yeah all the features of pi
spark and the multipprocessing and
everything going to be unlocked because
you are using now an advanced format but
of course you are not seeing the files
now you are working as a table like you
are in any SQL database. So I have now a
schema inside the table and now once I
start quering this table I am back to
SQL course as I presented for you SQL.
You're going to go to the SQL editor and
you don't have to to understand the full
path like here you know in the volume
you have to understand the like where
the file is stored and stuff like that.
So we're going to remove this crab from
here. Uh now think like you are working
with any other database. I'm going to go
to the tables and I'm going to say and
by the way if you don't want to write
the whole path if you hover on the table
name you're going to find those two
arrows like insert table name or if you
go to the volume as well it's going to
tell you insert the volume name. So this
is just quick way in order not to mess
up let's say the whole path. So I always
click that it's easy for me or you start
tipping. So now guys we are back to SQL
and if I run it this is I can say a
magic for
um maybe I'm old guy [laughter] seeing
this but this is really magic with just
simple SQL query I'm able to use the
whole technology stack guys I'm I'm
already using the delta files I'm
already using the whole platform of
multipprocessing everything in the RAM I
can use bispark like um it is um it is
now very very friendly for you data
analyst. So now we are working with the
cloud. We are working with
multiprocessing. The data goes into the
memory. Um you can do very huge SQL
queries with very fast performance and
uh yeah you are working directly in a
data lake. So you are not working to
simple database. You are working
directly in data lake. You don't need
like someone to provide you an extra
database because you can only know SQL.
No, you are working directly on scalable
system. So this something big I I see it
from my perspective it's something big
and uh yeah
um with that those are the two ways
let's say on how to upload data the
volume I'm going to say just practice it
do it once but it is not something for
you as data analyst it's something we do
for data engineering and we can explain
uh tomorrow why but for you if the data
inside the tables then you are unlock
unlocking the whole uh benefits of data
bricks And uh yeah, you're going to go
and repeat the same thing like twice,
three times and upload all your files
inside the schema. And we start using
SQL. Now, what I'm going to say, I need
really a break like 15 minutes. I'm
going to go and put a counter and um let
me just check here the plan. Look at
this. We already covered a lot of
things. Uh we already covered what is
data bricks, the interface, how to get
the data. So actually we are covered the
module one and um if you go to the
homework this is something that you're
going to do tomorrow. I'm going to
double check it again but I have for you
here the steps again in order for you uh
to follow at home and on on your paste.
So I have some links for you as well. So
actually I can say we are done with the
module one. The module two I'm going to
wear the hat of the data analyst. Um I
will not I will stop talking about data
engineering because I talked a lot about
that. I am data engineer so that's why I
bring it a lot. Now I'm going to explain
few stuff about data analysts and the
mindset and then I'm going to show you
all the possibilities on how to use data
bricks as a data analyst and if you do
this I think then you have more enough
skills let's say to say I can use the
platform and at the end there is I hope
that we can do it. I'm going to connect
data bricks to PowerBI in order to do
the things that to let them interact
with each others. So for now I'm going
to take take 15 minutes break. I hope
you guys enjoying the course or let's
say the boot camp and those stuffs make
sense for you. So I'm going to take 15
minute. I'm going to make timer now and
then we come back in 15 minutes. So
thank you so much and
be right back. Right. I'm going to drink
some water.
Okay.
[snorts] I hope you guys got a nice
break
and to uh maybe
that was a lot of information at once.
Um um I was just following the chat. So
I'm really glad that you are enjoying
the boot camp. Um yeah, again it is
something that's um yeah my first time
yesterday doing it. Uh but I used to it
because I um usually spend sometimes at
my work sitting with colleagues and
trying to explain things for them.
That's why I I'm used to it onetoone
let's say but not for 2,000 people. And
it's it's crazy that we have more than
2,000 people interesting in data bricks
and staying too long too late uh for
this. Um I think for the next boot camp
that I might make I'm going to make it a
little bit earlier so it's not too late
for you because I want to drink as well
cafe and uh yeah it's too late. If I
drink coffee now I will not sleep good.
So that's why uh I didn't like like the
light late uh boot camp because I want
to drink something
uh maybe only tea but uh yeah next time
I'm going to make it a little bit
earlier uh in order to for me to drink
coffee and it's not too late for you. So
um I'm really happy that you are
enjoying the boot camp and it is not
that um let's say uh complicated for
you. I was a little bit afraid because
um those kind of platforms they need
time you know you cannot do it in one go
but I'm happy that you guys are able to
to follow. Uh I saw uh repeated
questions about uh the links. So either
you sign up and you're going to get all
the links inside uh the course or the
notion road map. So the notion road map
going has all like everything all the
links all the tasks. So you can follow
me using the notion road map. I think
Taha did post it like many times. You're
going to find the link to the data sets
um link to the GitHub to the code and
stuff. So um I'm going to keep adding
stuff to it. So it's not something the
notion road map it's something completed
because to be honest I didn't have a
time for it. Um I started creating it
like two days ago but um I'm going to
keep adding resources to it. So it's
going to be living in notion road map
from my side and um you you can sorry
you can keep uh using it for your datab
bricks training. So I will add like
certificate links and stuff like that
but for now you have the basics you have
the road map let's say the steps the
data sets and stuff and um if you don't
need my data sets you can use your own.
So if you have the data set that you use
in order to do a projects previously
with PowerBI and stuff you can use it.
So it's not all about following me step
like exactly like how I do it. Okay. Uh
grab the data that you like from other
projects and do the steps. I like it
more than just like you know using only
my data. But my data um the engineering
one is a dirty data because we have to
do a lot of data preparations and
cleanup. And uh the analytics one it is
the sales um sales data set which is
always easy to understand. you know you
have orders you have customers products
and the HR one I I believe I have to
generate more data sets over the time
but there is a lot of things to do so um
yeah you can use my data sets in order
to practice data bricks or um just use
your own okay um now we will do the
second part I hope that you guys got a
nice um uh small break uh in order to
have some energy for the next session
this one I hope that's going to be
interesting as well for you. I hope you
are enjoying the mix between theory, the
why, and not only the tool because I I
believe it's more important than the
tool. So now um let's have a look back
to our notion road map. Let me just
now it's going to start recording and
start sharing. So now
um as I said this is the notion if you
are new here let's say you missed the
first part again um this is the whole
notion road map you can get the link in
the chat there is here uh the data sets
we have a discord community guys I
really recommend you to join there um
because to be honest there are a lot of
um like communications in or comments in
YouTube in LinkedIn and stuff and not
able to follow everything But I'm
enjoying a lot the discord community. Uh
there is like uh uh the section of the
cafe break where we talk about things. I
can jump to data engineering data
analytics. So join the discord and uh
ask questions and um and don't expect
that I'm going to answer everything
because the community going to help you.
So it's for you. It's not for me. It's
for you. So that's you can guys connect
to each others and start helping each
others. And I already uh knew a lot of
nice people there. Yeah. For example,
Plexol and Taho, they are from the
Discord community. So, it is as well
nice chance for me to get closer to you.
So, yeah. Uh go to Discord. Um the
GitHub things uh it has the data, but
every all the codes that I'm going to
show, I'm going to put it there as well.
So, it's not finalized. Now, uh we're
going to go to the mod dual 2. So, now
the introduction that was all about data
bricks. Now we're gonna focus on the
data analytics part. So you as data
analyst how to use this platform. Okay.
And um yeah and I'm going to show you a
few examples on how to do it. Okay. And
you can use it in order to do projects.
I recommend you at the end in the task
in the homework I'm going to let you
tell you to build a project to build
sales dashboards or customer dashboard
or something like that inside data
bricks. Okay. So now uh what we going to
do? Um yeah here sorry the module two.
So now um can I talk about you data
analysts like what are the different
levels that we have as a data analyst
and then what is your role? I think I
explained a lot about how to use it uh
how to use data bricks as a data analyst
and then we jump to practice. So I'm
going to show you the notebooks going to
show you the different ways on how to um
to use data bricks and we're going to
talk about something really interesting.
I think this going to be the most fun
one that I tell you it's going to be
you're going to have a chat with the
data. So we're going to use the AI genie
in order to talk to the data. This is
the most important like this fun one.
Okay. And uh after that if time is left
I hope that we can go and connect
PowerBI to data bricks. So now let's
start step by step. I wanted to give you
again the big picture about analytics
and maybe explain some basics about yeah
how things works. Maybe you know already
this but this is like at my work each
time I join a company I like I switch
between five companies. Okay. I try to
map the company to this picture here.
This is very important to understand
where the company at because different
companies have different scenarios
different situation with the data with
the platforms and stuff and some you
might join like small company but they
are like really advanced in how they do
analytics and then you join maybe um a
big company where they are really at the
start with with the data. So or maybe it
depend on the department and stuff. So
it's really important for you as a data
analyst to understand where my
department where is my company at this
map at this road map are we just at the
start are we in the middle so you have
to map it and each time I join a project
I try to map here and say you know what
we are at the level I don't know in the
middle or at the left and stuff and I
talked about it to the managers um and
uh this helped me a lot to build
completely new projects like because
it's easy to understand for many
And I really recommend you if you join
new projects or new company to
understand where they are and how they
do those stuff
and to map it and to push on the company
to say you know what we have nice
reports let's go to the next level and
you have like a road map for you for
data analytics. Okay. And I can tell you
the situation in many companies is
really really bad. We didn't do anything
yet with the data. We are just at the
start as a data analyst or data
engineer. So now this is the road map
and uh usually we start with the raw
data. Let me just take the laser. It's
fancy. So the company has raw data and
some companies I can tell you many
companies they are at this level. They
didn't do anything yet. They just have
data. They just have row data and they
might have some Excel left and right but
they didn't do anything with the data.
Okay. And uh and I can tell you 80% of
companies they didn't do anything
because first of all they are busy with
their processes with their products and
stuff and they think those stuff are
only like let's say luxury things. If
you have extra money maybe you can do
something with the data but the scenario
totally changed because all the
companies understood without good data
you are doomed. you cannot do real AI uh
use cases. That's why now a lot of
companies pushing on on this road map to
have a company that is data driven.
Okay. So if the companies are not
focusing on this road map, they going to
be doomed especially in the AI. So
that's why many companies currently in
the road data. Then you're going to find
maybe other companies they start
building some data warehouses, some data
league. they hired some data engineers
and they start cleaning their data. So
this is something that some companies
did understand. Okay, the raw data is
not usable and I have to start building
data lakeouses. So this is something
that actually I'm going to say uh let me
grab the data engineer. So this is
something that the data engineer going
to do. Okay.
Now um
okay now as a data analyst um the first
thing or let's say the most use case
that you're going to spend years
building is the standard reports.
So the standards reports it is just like
you know you join you join um um a
department and you tell them uh you know
what you guys have an excel you're
building the whole tracking or
monitoring for the process using this
excel let me make from it like standard
report that the whole department can use
like if someone has an question like for
example how many orders we got yesterday
okay so what happened uh yesterday or
the last month or the last quarter
So we built standard report and
everything that you see in PowerBI and
Tableau they are all almost all of them
you are building a standard report for
the company. So it's standard
dashboards. A lot of people going to
join and see those standard reports and
it is something that of course companies
needs a lot because most of the work
currently is done inside Excel and no
one is building let's say clean standard
reports and that's why uh many companies
are now hiring data analysts in order to
build for them standard reports. So this
is something you're going to have huge
audience,
huge audience that's going to use the
standard reports. But now I can tell you
as well many companies didn't yet build
standard reports correctly for their
departments. All of them like yeah not
all of them a lot of them are still
using Excel. A lot of them are still
using some PowerPoints and stuff to do
presentation for their reports. So they
are not there yet. Now of course this is
the first level but now if you want to
make a domain driven or let's say
datadriven company you cannot just wait
on the standard report. The thing is
standard reports takes time to be built
okay from you data analyst or uh from PI
developer. So
they going to yeah let's say um you're
going to build a report maybe takes you
few weeks or a month and then you have
here huge audience and they're going to
tell you you know what this is not
exactly what I need I need one extra
column I need one extra filter I need
this data sets to be inserted so they
are always like asking for extra stuff
and you as datalist or let's say as a PI
uh developer you going to take time you
say okay I'm going I'm going to take
this column. I'm going to take this
filter, extend the report, make new
report. So, you're going to be a
bottleneck for people. Okay? And uh
that's why
you have to offer in the companies as
well somehow on how to do ad hoc
analyszis. So that means the user um
going to do in his own uh the analyszis.
So they don't wait for anyone from the
tech or the IT to build the reports.
They going to be building it. And of
course there is different types of data
analyst. Okay, I'm talking about now the
IT data analyst of course from the IT
but there is like from the business side
as well the data analyst and stuff. So
I'm just saying the next level is to let
people build their own reports. They
going to build their own uh uh insights
and you cannot be the bottleneck to say
only the standard reports. So this is
one thing and same goes for the next one
self-service PI.
So not only quering the data but as well
building the dashboard on my own as as a
business user. So this is something that
go advanced. If your company already
offering this solution to say you know
what my business user has different
options to consume the data they can
um they can uh consume my PowerBI report
but if they want they can go and use uh
SQL editor to do it or they can use I
don't know um um Tableau or something.
So you have to understand where the
company and I believe very very very few
companies offering their users to play
with the data. They don't offer them
like let's say uh a way to do
self-service BI or like um that I go and
jump immediately work with the data. It
is something that's really hard to do in
PowerBI even. Okay. So it's something
yeah many companies are not there yet
and of course
uh it's going to be a dream if you have
a real data scientist working on the
next levels. Do I have here data
scientist? No I don't have one. Okay I
have to grab a new one.
Yeah. So now for the right side it's all
about so yeah as a data analyst you
always answer one question. What what
happens? Yeah. And why it happens? Where
is the bottleneck? Why? Um uh not why uh
how many orders did happen in the last
month? How many um yeah which yeah which
step in my process is bad which which
step is good. But if you're going to ask
stuff about the future, about
production, about um let's let's say
about what going to happen in the
future, it's something that actually
data scientist going to do.
And my friends uh it is something that I
rarely see that um yeah that that
analyst really um scientists sorry did
really achieve um let's say final goals
of this road map. So because the thing
is data scientist join companies you see
so they hire data scientists in the
company he or she joined the company and
they say okay I'm going to do now some
let's say machine learning stuff I'm
going to predict the future I'm going to
yeah going to do stuff but where is the
data going to say ah you know what the
data is still raw still here the data is
still here so you as a data I saw it
like multiple times I know at least five
data scientists join products
join projects. They are ready. They have
the skills. They have everything but
there is no data. They so they go over
here and they play the role of the data
engineer and they do stuff. So now we
will not go deep dive in the data
science stuff because this is not the
goal of this uh boot camp. Now we're
going to focus on this. So now
um we want to analyze the data but there
is not only one way. Now the thing is
what is very cool is that you can do the
whole thing now not the whole thing I'm
going to say
a tool like datab bricks going to help
you to do those stuff okay but it will
not do do it for you so you can use data
bricks to clean the data as that
engineer you can do the whole BI
self-service as well using data bricks
self-service BI I'm going to say data
bricks is amazing to do to use. And I'm
not really sure about the standard
reports, guys. I'm not really sure that
the standard reports is something that
we use PowerBI uh sorry, data bricks to
do. We still need PowerBI to do the
standard reports. So that means
um from this picture, yeah, cleaning the
data never used PowerBI for that. We
don't use PowerBI to in real projects.
We don't use PowerBI to clean the data.
Now to do some PI or let's say
self-service things data bricks is
amazing tool but standard reports still
PowerBI dominates and Tableau yeah not
only PowerBI Tableau but datab bricks is
not there yet data you cannot say you
know what I will just use only data
bricks for data analyszis this is
something that they are pushing on but
the thing is in it is like very yeah how
to explain it the business users are
very demanding people Okay. So your end
users are very demanding. They're going
to ask you move the filter in the right
side, add more views. So you need
flexibility on building the dashboard,
the standard reports. And datab bricks
will not offer you any flexibility to do
that. So you can build something like
very standard like let's say very um
yeah, let's say first version of the
dashboard, but once uh you deep dive
into the demand of building standard
reports, you're going to hit the limit.
So that's why actually we still need
PowerBI
even in big scale database um data
platforms. So I see it like this. I see
it's now easy to do all those levels
using data bricks and you still have to
learn PowerBI to do the standard
reporting. Now I can tell you 80 80%
let me just here make this here as a
data analyst 80% of your work are
building those stuff. Okay. So the
PowerBI stuff and those like the ad hoc
and the self service it is something
that is nice extra advanced for you and
you say you know what in our company we
do self-service BI and we're going to
use it using datab bricks we will not
use powerb of course you can do the
whole thing guys you can do the whole
thing you using powerbi so the first
level sorry here clean the data build
standard reports add to kind of but yeah
we have better now we have better um we
have possibility to do that using the
data bricks. So this is how it looks
like for me. Of course this is a tool
ple which tool is better and stuff there
is not always right and wrong but for my
side I think in big companies they're
going to always work with those two. So
as data engineer it's nice thing to do
with the data bricks but for you as data
analyst if you can master those two then
it's going to be really amazing. Now uh
again as I told you most of the
companies are still still here they are
still here struggling here. Okay not
like this still dream a dream for many
companies. Yeah. So and tools like data
bricks can make things easy but it will
not implement it. So having just data
bricks doesn't mean that everything is
solved. You need to have a right data
strategy and right mindset in the teams
to build it. Now let's go again to the
levels. Uh I'm going to say levels and
tools of data of yeah data analysts. Um
I'm going to take this over here. So I'm
going to say you have a database. This
is the first level of doing data uh
analytics. So now yeah my friends the
first level that now I'm going to say
80% of data analysts are using Excel. So
what's going to happen? You're going to
have a small data sets
and uh you're going to say uh just a
second let me just get something here as
well.
Yeah, this one here. So now the first
level
uh of that analyst you're going to go
and say yeah you know what I'm going to
extract here um small data sets one
table small data small uh let's say
table I'm going to put it in excel and
I'm going to do here everything inside
excel the whole process end to end so
this is the first level and I can tell
you until now 20 uh 26 many people are
doing this many people many companies
are doing this because it's easy like
they don't have to learn any platform
they just have to learn Excel and it's
easy to kick off you know the projects
you don't need data engineers and the
whole thing so that's why because if it
is easy
80% of people are doing this doing
manual work and this is I can say a
cancer for any company because you're
going to have a lot of data scientists
cleaning up the data multiple times and
repeating repeating the same work and uh
they are not able to do any real
analytics big data uh stuff because you
cannot do this on a big scale data data
lakehouse or um a big data on the
company. You need always to extract only
small subset of the data. [snorts] And
uh yeah, good luck doing big data
analyszis on top of this. That's why the
second level you might say, you know
what, I'm going to go advanced now
and I'm going to say
um I'm going to go and grab a PowerBI.
I will not use any more Excel and using
PowerBI
things going to be more organized and
things are nicer. So you're going to use
PowerBI to pull the data and you're
going to start building your
visualization. So I'm going to say this
is the second level but still inside
PowerBI you are doing the whole thing.
So you are doing uh something we called
ETL but you're going to do the load
uh sorry the extract
transform and load the whole thing you
have to do everything in PowerBI the
heavy lifting happens inside and um I
can tell you this is not yeah this is
still better than Excel um but um yeah
you can handle better the data it has
more speed because the data are loaded
in the memory the column store so you
can start doing some fast analyzes way
faster than Excel. Uh but the thing is
the extract and transformation it is
something that is not really um yeah not
really helpful for PowerBI because if
you have a big data set then you're
going to noticed that it's taking too
long time to do the data transformations
to do the loading and if the data just
get little bit bigger few gigabytes
you're going to it's going to be out of
control you cannot use PowerBI for that.
So that's why the next level that you
say
um um yeah let's go and build a data
warehouse. Do I have an icon for it
here? Yeah.
But I will not build it on my own. I
would love to have a data engineer to
build for me a data warehouse. So he's
going to go and um grab a data engineer
and let's say he going to build
an automated um yeah pipelines and he
going to do for you the extract and load
and uh transformation the ATL and you
going to go and say I'm going to go and
connect the PowerBI only to do the data
visualizations.
Okay. So with that you reduced your
heavy lifting and you focus on answering
the business questions. Okay. So this is
way way way better than before because
here you spend most of your time doing
the ETL on your own. Okay. And not
focusing on the business, not focusing
on delivering fast reports because here
in order to deliver one insight, it
makes takes you a month. Okay? Here it
might takes you like maybe a week or
something. Here you can do it in a few
days. Yeah.
So
this is the level three.
So um you can you can uh focus on what
you you do the best. Okay. And not it's
not like it's not your job to work with
the raw data to be honest. Now we're
going to go to the last level. Now the
thing is data warehouses.
It's only for structured data and in
companies we have a lot of very
interesting data that for you as data
analyst that you cannot find inside data
warehouses. Okay. And I can tell you
data warehouses they die over the time.
So as this gets bigger. Okay. Uh this
guy going to struggle all the time
bringing the data in the data warehouse
and he cannot bring all the data. So for
example if he come as data and say hey
go and bring me those I don't know JSON
files. You going to say wait in data
warehouse we cannot put uh unstructured
data. I can only put structured data.
Yeah. and maybe can I come to the data
and you tell me there is like a big
table and say you know what the ETL is
taking already five uh let's say uh 12
hours to load I cannot put any more big
tables so a lot of things can be
rejected from the data engineer because
he's using
yeah let's say um onrem system or using
um some some old things so actually you
are limited still limited but you still
it's way better than before okay now the
last phase
I'm going to say uh it is where your
data engineer is building for you a data
lake house using data bricks
just second. So,
so here your data engineer is building
for you a data lakehouse using a
scalable system and then you as data
analyst
you have here not only the possibility
to work with um yeah with data bricks
you can connect your nice powerbi to
very very fast uh infrastructure and as
well you can use datab bricks on your
own to do amazing things. So not only
you are doing things with PowerBI, you
can as well use data bricks to do data
analyszis. And I think if you reach to
this level
where you are where your company is
working already data bricks and building
lake houses and you as that analyst have
the skills to use those two tools I
think then you mastered or let's say you
know the best tools. Okay. But that
doesn't mean that you are a great data
analyst. Okay. I'm saying this because
it's not not about the tools but this is
the last level that you can reach in
order to do
um yeah tooling skills. Yeah. Not not
not the soft skills or the right mindset
for that analyst. We are just talking
about tools. But this if you can do this
then you can do way more than just
Excel. You you are faster. You can work
on very like uh different data that you
didn't dream of before. and um yeah and
uh you can work with big data and stuff
like that. So I think those are the
levels that I always think about that
analyst and um yeah most of the
companies are yeah they are still here
like most of the analysts they are still
doing this one here they love their
excel um and yeah a few managed to build
the data warehouse and I think this is
the future here where they going to
build lakeouses and the companies are
moving toward this not only because of
yeah yeah data bricks and stuff it's
because they need the data to be ready
for AI. It's all about AI now. So now
those are the different levels and now
let's go back to this image where I'm
going to tell you where is it? This was
somewhere here.
Okay. So I'm going to go back to this
image in order to let you know how we
work as a data analyst using data
bricks. Now I will reduce this little
bit because this is very chaotic. So now
you understood so far that someone like
that engineer going to build those
bronze server gold. Okay. Now it's all
about what happens here. Like it's a
little bit chaotic. So
I'm going to show you only one way on
how to work with data bricks. Okay. But
I think this is the right way. So now uh
what can happen that you as a data
analyst you have a goer. Okay. So again
here now uh the first thing that we do
is that
since it's not like before okay now if
you start working in big data you will
get as well big data you will get a lot
of tables you will get um a lot of files
a lot of things so it's going to be
really hard for you as I said to go and
immediately start building your
dashboard
so this is something
so this is something really hard to do
immediately
You cannot go and immediately build a
PowerBI dashboards because you don't
know what is the content here. Okay, you
don't know exactly which table to grab,
which um yeah, which data set to use. So
now what you going to do? You have to
explore this.
So you have to explore it.
Now in order to explore the data sets,
you have different tools in in data
bricks. So as I said um I'm going to say
the f yeah the easy option is to use um
an SQL editor.
So SQL editor in datab bricks.
So this is the first option that you can
use
and um using just SQL you can manage to
start exploring the data and the nice
thing is that so let me grab those
standard users.
Now you have here standard users and I
told you there is somewhere a business
user or let's say powerful user from
those standard users that understand the
requirements and understand how to deal
with the data. So the thing is you're
going to grab one of the power users and
you're going to start together with this
user exploring the data together. Yeah.
So I'm going to say powerful or yeah
let's say our business user.
So now you both start exploring this
data lake in order to identify exactly
the data that you need and you can both
work on Excel and uh sorry um SQL and
you both can use the SQL editor so you
can share it with you. It's like you
start writing query then you send an
email this um like I um I trained two oh
yeah one thing in my projects I had one
data analyst and one business user and I
trained them I made like such a session
to tell them you know what so you start
writing the SQL I told the analyst you
start writing the SQL query write it
until the end and once you have the
first draft share the SQL with the
business user he knows SQL as well and
then they both start working on the same
SQL query like imagine that crazy right
so both they u he tell you oh this is
the false this is not the right table to
join this is the correct table and they
start talking and discussing stuff using
the SQL editor yeah so now
once let's say
when they have like multiple queries
okay as they work they're going to build
a lot of queries now once they have all
those queries they going to go and put
everything in one dashboard So
I'm going to call it the first version
first version of the dashboards.
So this is what we do in data bricks. We
can go and put all those queries in a
dashboard in order to have the first
look of our use case our our reports and
of course the dashboard is getting the
data from here. Yeah. [snorts]
So now you can build your first the
first version of the dashboard using
data bricks. And now once everyone is
happy the business user the and you as
that analyst you say you know what this
is exactly going to solve a lot of
problems. So now what is naturally the
next step is to expose it for the
audience right for the standard users.
So they go and convert this dashboard to
a powerbi report so that everyone can
benefit with this.
So this is the cycle. Um I'm going to
repeat it again. Let's say so data
analysts you start exploring and working
with the raw data using data bricks and
you write only SQL queries. Once you
have a nice version of it, you talk to
your business users. Hopefully you have
someone that knows SQL and you guys
start working on enhancing the queries
and then you start putting all the
puzzles together in one dashboard and
discussing okay this looks nice it and
once you say this is exactly what we
need this is exactly are the dashboard
you go at the last step and start
building PowerBI report a standard
report okay so that's why we have data
bricks and powerbi and uh this is exly
the process and exploration becomes
something very important as a data
analyst and you're going to spend most
of your time just exploring again
if you have an Excel or a normal
database you're going to have like five
six tables and that's it but now since
things are easy for us data engineers
we're going to give you a lot of data
we're going to give you a lot of tables
and suddenly you as data analyst you're
going to say wow we have here thousands
table I
really I I built like few data products
and the count the whole thing is like
300 tables. So this is too much yeah for
data analyst and to be honest it's now
their job to start exploring correctly.
That's why now exploration is something
really important to learn as data
analyst because you are working now with
big data and big companies. That's why
you're going to spend most of your time
exploring together with the business
user
until you guys bring the correct data
from this huge data base. Okay. So, uh
once you have the version and then you
can work on it. Now, before it was
easier because it is clear the company
has five six tables and you build uh
your dashboard. But now you are working
on scale database. So now I'm going to
show you how to do those stuff guys.
uh using uh data bricks and of course
there is something called notebooks
um yeah let me just rank those stuff
little bit so okay
so I'm going to say working with SQL
editor
and building the dashboard it is not
that hard okay so it's something
[clears throat] medium it's not like
writing SQL you know what it's not that
hard now building as well PowerBI report
it's as well medium it's not crazy but
there is as well I saw some that analyst
they were able to use a notebook
I can tell you later why because I don't
want to overwhelm you so there's
something called notebooks now the thing
is some data analysts go crazy
and they say I don't want to learn only
SQL I want to learn Python I I want to
learn everything I like I saw some
curious people they say I I want to
learn programming but I will not program
a pipeline but I will use the features
of pandas of pi spark in order to
analyze the data. So you have some crazy
data analyst, they go full in and they
start using not only SQL, they want to
do a for loop, they want to do an LS,
they want to do um yeah some pispark
things in order to analyze the data. So
they go and start uh using notebooks.
But this my friends is hard. It's
advanced. Okay, not that hard. But you
just have to learn the language and I
don't expect that a lot of analysts
going to do that. Okay. But I'm going to
find few that are willing to do that. So
I'm going to say this is advanced thing
to do. [snorts] So the rest is easy or
let's say medium and the easiest of
course I'm going to put the easy like
tab only on the AI because the AI going
to be the easiest way to do PI. Yeah.
But now let's go back to this picture
and I will guide you. Oh, let's see.
We're going to have few examples on how
to do the uh those stuff. [snorts]
Now let's go back to our data bricks. So
that's what the theory. Sorry for that.
I always take my time but I enjoy this.
I enjoy explaining behind the scenes and
how we work. I want you to understand
this because I see a lot of people just
talking about u the tools. Okay. Uh this
is I don't think this is the right
knowledge to share. we have to share a
little bit how things works behind
because I was at your age or let's say
I'm an old white old guy but I was young
and I didn't really understand like why
why I'm learning scale why I'm learning
Python why I'm learning this tool how
how like how I'm going to use this in a
company so that's why I try to push on
this little bit and uh maybe sometimes
it's a little bit boring to see only a
theory but [snorts] um I think we must
share those stuff how things works in
companies Now,
so back now back to data bricks. Again,
this is only your web browser.
Everything runs behind the scene in the
cloud and um as you can see guys, it is
um yeah, nothing to install. Now
[snorts] again what I told you
everything it's very important to see
the catalog. Now we're going to go to
our catalog again. Uh we uploaded only I
think only one file, right? So we build
it one table but I we uploaded all the
files to volumes but I will not use
volumes. It is very stupid to use as a
data analyst here. It's way better to
use tables. Okay. So now what I'm going
to do I will just go and upload this uh
other files just quickly. So I will go
and create a new table.
Drag drop. I think adding data to
um to data bricks is easier than RPI.
So the second table is going to be the
products. Of course, since I said I will
use sales DB, we have to change the
schema. Always check the destination.
And by the way guys, if you get for some
reason here nulls. Okay. So now in the
preview here to see whether everything
is correct or not. If you see here
things are null and red that means the
format is not automatically uh let's say
uh correct. So you have to go to the
advanced attributes and here you're
going to find the file type. It's
usually CSV so you cannot have any other
type and uh you check the separator the
skip character and stuff. So uh in the
data set that I give you it is a comma
separator and the first row is the
header. So it the default thing is
enough and I think it's data is like
smart enough to detect those stuff but
for some reason if you are getting nulls
then you have to play with those options
here until you get it right or you
understand the CSV file whether it's
correct or not. So now I see the data
this is my new table. I'm going to leave
it as it is. It is in the correct schema
create table. So now my CSV file is
uploaded and at the same time datab
bricks is converting the file format to
delta format which is way nicer
than CSV and now I have it inside a
database or let's say yeah my catalog we
say catalog we don't say database okay
for the for the language it looks like
database but we say catalog it's inside
my catalog now the whole thing we call
it unity catalog so if someone tells you
show me the catalog or go to the
catalog. We mean this over here like a
database. But I this word is not that
accurate if I keep saying database.
Okay. So now we're going to upload a
third one in our catalog. Let me just go
it uh quickly. So the facts I'm going to
go and drop the facts.
So that's it.
Looks fine. Add the schema. Schema and
create table.
Great. Now we have all the three files.
Of course, as I told you, uh you can go
and practice with any data sets. I have
here for you another one, the HR. It is
only one one data set that I use for
Tableau. You can use it if you want. But
uh now I just introduced the sales in
order to have three tables. Okay. Now
what I wanted to do offline and not we
will not do that now. Now the unity
catalog or the catalog of data bricks
has a lot of things. This it's really
amazing you know we have something
called metadata in databases. It is just
description of my tables description of
my columns and stuff. But in data bricks
they went to the next level of the
metadata. they knew that the metadata is
the core of uh let's say for any AI use
cases in the future. Yeah. So that's why
they focused a lot on offering a lot of
features inside let's say the metadata
or the catalog so that they use AI to
learn on the usage to learn on the
metadata. So now again what is metadata?
This is a very important word to
understand. It is just the column name,
the data type, the comment, um
the table name. So it so it's just
describing your data, data about the
data. Okay, so it's just the
description. It's not the data itself.
Now in data bricks, um you can add here
as you see the column name and the data
types and very very important for AI, if
you are building as a data engineer or
data analyst some nice tables or nice
views, you have to add comments.
Comments are description. So what are
the customer key? What is the customer
ID? The more you add content to datab
bricks, the smarter the platform going
to be because it's going to use
everything. It's going to use all those
metadata to uh to teach the AI to
fine-tune the AI model and that's later
you're going to use it in order to do
chat with your data and stuff. So the
the whole mindset changes as as you work
with the catalog is that before I added
comments just to yeah nice info for the
team so nice info for my project you
know what this is a customer key if a
person goes and sees the comment they
going to understand the content but now
we add comments we add metadata not only
for us but as well for AI so now that's
why it is become I'm gonna write an
article about it but it is something
that is getting very very important
It is it is way more important even now
than data modeling. If you have a
perfect data set, but you don't have a a
good metadata inside it, your AI going
to be crabby. So now the table has a lot
of things to see. As you can see the
overview and as you can see here AI
starts working with you in in data
bricks like everywhere. If you're start
writing SQL, if you start writing
pispark,
um you're going to get always an AI
assistance. So um yeah, look look at the
description. It says the table contains
information about the customer. It
includes details such as names, stuff.
Oh, this is really nice description. I'm
going to say okay, I'm going to accept
this description. And now my table has a
nice description. So I just described
the uh the table. Let me check. I can as
well generate a comment from the AI.
Let's see. So it is unique identifier
for each customer recorded in the table.
This is nice. So I'm going to go and add
it. So now I'm making as you can see I
don't have to write anything. Let me
just go to the maybe country generate a
comment.
So now AI generating metadata for me. So
that's later the AI going to use it in
order to do nice things. Of course this
is easy for the AI in those data sets
because it is very obvious. Yeah. What
is a country? But in real projects the
AI will has no idea what are those
columns for. Okay, because in real
projects you're going to get some data
set that has very cryptical names like
yeah I cannot say a lot of things about
the work. Okay, but um in the car
industry we have a lot of tables that's
you need read a lot of documentations in
order to understand the columns. So uh
it will not be obvious AI will not help
you to describe you have to grab it from
some documents and try to write the
comments on your own. But here things
are easy and uh yeah so now another
thing what you can find here the symbol
of data the details permissions and all
those stuff we found it in databases
normal normal databases but now there is
history look how amazing at this I can
say I can see now the full versions of
my tables look at this
um bar this is my email address I
created a
I change a column because I added the
description. I change another column.
Now you can see a log of everything
happens to the table. And this thing you
will never see it in databases. And
that's all because my friends, we are
using something called an open format,
an open file format. Where is it?
I think we are using delta tables. Delta
tables going to store all the logs, all
the transactions. That's why you're
going to see everything. I have this oh
my god in my projects like if I make any
mistakes I'm going to see immediately
who to blame or what happens. So you see
in some nice logs and another thing the
lineage.
So you're going to see um uh let's say
if you have multiple tables or multiple
layers you're going to feel the this is
interesting for only maybe data
engineering. Then insights
um I don't have anything here but you
can see which user actually using the
most of your table. You're going to see
how often this table is used from you
from other you have a lot of statistics
and all those stuff is captured inside
the cloud and it's going to be used as
well for the the AI. So this is yeah
next level guys because to be honest
those stuff we will never find in any uh
normal like onrem data warehouse stuff
like this. So it is capturing a lot of
things like if I go now and do a query
inside this table it can be captured and
stored inside the insight but of course
since we are we have free new account
and um yeah I think things looks empty
and the last one um quality let me
enable that quality monitoring let's go
and enable
so disable disable
I have to configure the schema and stuff
but I can add out of the box as well
quality checks how how many nulls uh
whether the data is complete and stuff
like that. So as you can see a table in
datab bricks have a lot of features and
and not only metadata. Yeah. So a full
full information as well. You can browse
your catalog by clicking on each of
those objects and you're going to see
some some stuff. Okay. So now I have my
three tables. I have my data. Now what
is the next step? Okay looks looks nice.
Now this data could be used in many
different use cases or in many things.
Now, as I said, you as a data analyst,
first you have to explore the data. So,
I keep jumping between those stuff.
Sorry for this.
So, yeah, I need an SQL editor to
explore the data. And now, if you go to
the tool, this is the most important
thing for you, an SQL editor. So, this
is something that we keep using all the
time and it is very advanced, the SQL
editor and data bricks. So if you go
inside it now you have to keep your eye
on few on a few stuff. Okay. So first of
all you have to keep your eye on this
green uh dots over here because
um because it's going to tell you
whether the compute is online or not. If
it's not online then you might get uh
yeah uh let's say you will not get
results or stuff like that. So make sure
it is online started or it might take
few times few minutes in order to be
started. Yeah, especially if it's small.
So, uh, make sure this is green. Um,
what you can keep your eye on on this
run all.
So, as a default going to be 1,00 and
this, oh my god, how much time I had a
not a conflict, but my data analyst or
my power users tells me bar I'm not
getting all the results and um yeah uh
in my data I have like 100 thousands.
Why I'm getting only thousands? It's
because of this here. I cannot change
it. it's going to be always as um limit
1,00. So if you have more than 1,00 make
sure to remove it, remove the limits.
But if you are just exploring it's
enough. So this is the reason number one
why someone cannot blame you why the
data is missing because of this. Now um
and as well what's else? Yeah. Now about
the query this is the SQL editor right?
So this is the whole SQL editor. I can
write now SQL select star from stuff
blah blah blah. Now you have here two
options. Either you're going to write
the full path of your your table. So
we're going to say okay
let's say uh it is the workspace because
we are at the workspace.
Okay. Then the next level going to be
the schema. Then the next level going to
be the table. So I'm giving the full
path. As I told you, you can go to the
two arrows and do that or actually you
can configure the whole thing here on
the top. So you can say always
everything that I query is going to be
from this sales DB
and I believe if you go and remove it,
it's going to work. So that you skip but
I always forget about this. So that's
why I always add at the start the
workspace and the sales DB. So you can
go and query. Now it's going to say uh
the schema has changed. New session is
required. Okay, start a new session.
Now I query the data and uh look at
this. I have some uh results as a table.
Now this is very classical as a
database. Now if you worked before in
databases, you always get the result as
uh a table, right? So this is something
that's yeah um classical. Now what I'm
going to do, I will just do one query
where I'm going to go to the fact um to
the sales. Let me just go over here to
the tables. So I going to go and target
the fact sales and I will do simple
aggregation where for example I want to
do yeah let me think maybe total orders
over the time. Okay so it is very simple
aggregation that we're going to do.
I hope that you guys are able to see um
if it's small say something right. So
now um what we're going to do uh we're
going to go and say
maybe the order dates. I grab the order
date. I grab the sales amount
and just to check whether they are
inside if yes. Okay. So now I'm going to
use some date trunk. I think it's date
trunk in order to make it as a month.
So,
so this is um order dates and now group
by
just grouping by just to do some basic
aggregations. Okay. Now,
um get some error sales amount. We don't
have sales amount.
Oh, I have to sum it, of course.
Now I get some uh let's say corrections
from the AI. So now I'm aggregating the
data by the month. Okay. So um it's
something that we usually do. We
aggregate the data by something whether
it's a date or a product or any
dimension. So so far it is usual stuff
right it's like only pure scale. But now
what I can do I can go and share my
query with someone else. So now I say
okay this is the result this is the
analyzis I'm happy about it I explored
let's say those stuff and now what I can
do I can go and share it with other
colleagues so now if my colleague is as
well having an account and stuff like
that I can go and say I'm going to write
his username or ID and I'm going to say
you know what I'm done with the
analyszis so now I'm talking about the
collaboration guys so um now scam
someone else as I said the power user
and they going to start working with you
in the same query. So now we're going to
share the query with them and start
working together. So he going to see
exactly
uh the query the same query but of
course depend on the security levels and
stuff they might see as well the same
data if they have enough rights on the
unit catalog. So that means now two
people are working in the same query and
they going to extend it and keep working
on it until it's correct. Now if you say
okay this is perfect this is exactly
what I'm searching for. Now of course
you can go and download it as Excel CSV
but I can go and change as well the
visual of it. So if you go and click on
the plus over here I can change how the
data looks like. So for example here um
yeah of course data bricks is going to
suggest for you something which is very
correct. I need a line chart. Line
charts are usually the best for things
over the time. So I'm going to have a
line chart for it. And I'm going to say
there's here some configurations. It's
like PowerBI. So you're going to change
here the type. Maybe you're going to
make it power line area pi. And you have
here some yeah some visuals. But again
it is not that strong like Tableau or
PowerBI. So the options here is only to
do exploration. It's not to do fully
standard reporting for your end users.
So now if I like this visual I'm going
to save it.
And now look at this. I'm able to see
the result as a data and as well as a
visual.
So I'm working this is something you
cannot do in SQL server or in in Oracle
or whatever. Yeah. So it's it's it's um
it's something that you can do
immediately on your query to do
visualization. So I'm going to say here
the uh orders over time.
And now we can do something more crazy.
I'm going to now call my query as well.
Uh EDA maybe um orders over time.
And now so I shared it with someone
else. I changed as well the visual of
the results. And now what we can do we
can go and add it to a dashboard. So now
this is a really nice query that I need
that I want to put it in a dashboard. So
what you going to do not only sharing it
I can go click on the yeah here small
icon and say add to a dashboard. So we
are making now brand new dashboards or
you can add it to already existing
dashboard. Okay. So I'm going to say
here I'm just exploring exploring the
sales dashboards
uh exploring the sales sorry sales data.
[snorts] So I'm going to go and add it
here. It's like dashboard. It's like
just collection of interesting insights
that you are finding inside your
dashboards. And now and now um data
bricks going to moves you to another
tab. So uh by the way once you start
working with data bricks you're going to
open a lot of tabs in your browser
because yeah it is it is how you start
something new. So I always start my day
with one tab and end up with 300 tabs.
So now uh I'm going to put now now this
is the dashboards and as you can see
this is the result of my query. Now it's
like you are doing PowerBI but very
simple one. So I can go and add a text
for it. I'm we're going to like make a
new dashboard soon. So I'm going to say
I'm just um EDA sales dashboard uh sales
data. Yeah. So just the title of my
dashboard. And now what we're going to
do, we keep going. We keep exploring the
data and whenever you find something
interesting for your project, for your
use case, you pin it in this dashboard.
So now what I'm going to do, I'm going
to go back to the queries
and
sorry SQL editor and keep going. So I'm
going to go and add maybe another query
and here on the plus. So a new query
and I just prepare few stuff so that's
we don't spend a lot of time just
writing. So now this is another query
where I'm just aggregating the data by
um uh by the category but here I think
have different schema sales DB
here as well sales DB I'm just showing
to do with the workflow. Okay. So now
another query another aggregation and
once I run it I am going to get this
data the row data of the results. I'm
going to go and add a new visualizations
for it. So now always databick is going
to try to bring for me a suitable
visualization but not always correct. So
now I might go with the me by charts
then save.
So now this is another visual where I'm
going to say okay this is sales by
category
uh this is as well my EDA query
sales by category.
So now if I like it and I can go share
it and if everything nice then I'm going
to go and as well add it to my
dashboard. So I will not create a new
dashboard for it. I'm going to go and
add an existing dashboard for that and
it's going to be
the exploration dashboard. So, import.
Now I'm getting exactly the result of my
second query. And as you can see, can
move things around. Come on, move. Oh.
Yes. Now, now it's moving.
So
with that, my friends, as you can see,
I'm putting all the knowledge that I'm
finding in the data. I'm exploring the
data, of course, not only me, maybe with
someone else. And each time I find
something really interesting, I'm
putting it in a dashboard. And now this
dashboard, of course, the knowledge that
I collected over the time, I can go and
share it with others. Yeah. But now
we're going to talk about the
dashboarding. Uh this is the dashboard
that we are building. If you go and give
it to a standard user, yeah, to someone
is very demanding. Someone that needs
colors, needs stuff. They might not like
it. Where is it? Here. They might not
like it. They're going to say, "What is
this? I need a filter. I need my logo. I
need my stuff." And here it is very um
yeah, as you can see, you can add only
visual text and filter and that's it. So
that's why this kind of work is actually
only like between small team or let's
say small group of people that are
exploring the data and understanding how
to let's say solve the business issues.
So that's why we don't expose those kind
of dashboards with big audience. Okay,
you cannot do that. First of all, it can
be very expensive. something that I
didn't talk about guys. Each time a
query each time you query here
um
so let me go back to the queries each
time you do a query it's going to use
some kind of resources in in AWS or
Azure you're going to use some resources
from data bricks some some servers and
stuff and you're going to pay for it
yeah and um if you now give huge
audience the dashboard and stuff each
click each something they do it's going
be uh something that's going to create
costs for the projects because you pay
as you use. Okay, so you pay as you use.
It's not like PowerBI like you put the
data in the in the data sets and the
import mode and stuff and uh the
calculations you are not paying for it
actually anything unless you use direct
query of course but now everything that
happens here has a price your company is
paying for it. Now if I expose of course
the dashboards for huge like I don't
know 3,000 people can I generate really
a lot of costs that's why this type of
activities is actually
um for exploring [clears throat]
purposes for understanding the data for
uh yeah for this kind of work for for
you even for you as data analyst because
now I've done the exploration on my data
sets next day I have a nice dashboard
without connecting any extra tool yeah
yeah to the data bricks without using
PowerBI. So this is something that is
really advanced for you as data analyst
that you write queries, you can
immediately build the quer the
dashboards and uh you can collaborate.
This is something amazing. I I I found
it with a lot of projects. We
collaborate with the business users
directly on the query level. So this is
something nice and um this is actually
the exploration phase yeah of data
bricks. Now there's another way where
let's say
you say you know what I don't want to
start from the SQL editor I don't want
to write queries I don't want SQL I just
want to build a dashboard yeah it's like
PowerBI I'm PowerBI guy I don't want to
go in the whole process writing SQL's
group by I don't know date trunk
function stuff I don't want to do the
whole thing I just want to build a nice
dashboards and I want to explore the
data using dashboards
So this is of course totally possible.
Uh this is another way but I don't
believe this is a nice way to analyze
data but another way that you go
immediately to the dashboard. So on the
left side you don't go to the escro
editor you go immediately to the
dashboard and say create a new
dashboard.
Now this is brand new dashboard. Okay.
So it's empty and yeah like any other
tool you need data first. So you go to
the data on the link side and here you
have different options. So either you
upload the data directly to the
dashboards it's like PowerBI okay or you
select and start picking the tables that
you want like for example over here add
a data source or you start writing a
query that is dedicated only for this
dashboards. So you have those three
options. Now if you are a guy that's or
girl you don't want to write any skill
query you're going to go and say yeah
add the data source and now you're going
to browse your unity catalog your
catalog okay so the workspaces uh the
sales DB and you're going to say yeah I
like the fact table I would like the
products as well and that's it I I need
those two and you say convert yeah so
now
Barbie going uh put those two tables to
be ready for you to be used for your
dashboard.
It's um a data brick. Sorry. So it's
like PowerBI. I'm selecting the things
that I need. Or if you don't want Yeah.
If you want still write SQL,
you can go and say create
fromQL query. So now you don't pick the
tables. What you going to do? You're
going to write your query that's going
to use for the dashboard. So as you can
see here, everything is empty. So and um
yeah you have to write the query that
you want. So we are skipping actually
the SQL editor. We are going through the
data dashboard and here uh for example
I'm going to go and put one query there.
I'm just joining the tables together.
I'm joining all the data that I need. So
for example
I'm joining the facts with the products
and then with the customers and I'm
selecting only the data that I need. As
you can see here
um I'm not doing the aggregations. Okay.
So there is no group by there is no
having there is no sum or average or
anything. Okay. So we are just
selecting we are picking the things that
we need in order to build the
dashboards. So now if I say this is the
query that I want then run
have syntax error. We have to find out
where is it.
I have here double point.
So now
I'm going to get the results and after
you say okay this is exactly what I need
then I go to dashboards. Now here you
have your data ready and you start
building your dashboard as a very simple
PowerBI thing. Yeah. So you say okay my
dashboard has sales
uh has a title. of sales dashboards.
I'll not go in a lot of details. I think
this is something really cool for you to
explore on your own.
So, but I just want to show you a few
things. So, this is a title of my
dashboard and then I'm going to say I
need a visual for it. So, I'm going to
go and grab a visual. And now,
>> [clears throat]
>> uh the first thing that you want to
decide is where the data comes from.
Now, in this dashboard, I said two
tables and then query. Actually, you
don't need all those stuff. You just
need one of them. So either the tables
or the query. So I like my query
and yeah so it has bar charts. So what
you going to do? I'm going to say
I'm going to count. So here you have to
yeah it's like you're defining a visual
in PowerBI. Nothing crazy.
So count the orders and then buy
something, right? So, by category
looks nice, right? No, not yet. Oh,
well, it looks nice. Look at this. Now,
I have a ranking of or let's say I can
see how much sales or how much orders we
have for each category. Um, you can
switch it by those arrows. So, you can
choose the visuals. You can It's just
fun. Yeah, you don't you don't need me
to show you those stuff actually. Um,
can I add a title? Title. Title.
Jo and access title. Yes. Okay. So, this
is the first dashboard. And maybe I'm
going to go and make another one,
another visual.
This time I'm going to make a line
charts. Again, I like line charts. And
then maybe the
sum of sales. and then by order date.
Order date. Order date. It's here.
So this is my line chart. Looks weird. I
have to flip. And with that I have my
second uh visual for my dashboards. So
as you can see guys, this is like yeah
one way as well to start immediately
with a dashboard. You don't have to
write first a lot of queries. But this
is how things works. You cannot if you
have an access to a lot of data you
cannot just go immediately and know
exactly how to build the dashboard. I
believe first you have to go through the
exploration phase through the SQLs and
only later you start building your
dashboards. Yeah. So um this is what you
can do. Now we have covered already few
stuff right.
Um we have covered already the SQL
editor which is the most important
thing. Yeah, the SQL editor in data
bricks. You saw the first version of a
dashboard. It is very fundamental. It's
not fancy, not pixel pixel perfect. And
um yeah, what is missing? Let's see the
most interesting one, the AI. Now,
of course, we have AI. So,
um we will not go to the machine
learning and AI stuff where we can train
a model or something. We are talking
about something called AI Genie. Uh it
is introduced uh by the way um uh
introduced a few um yeah maybe I'm going
to say half years so far for the AI
genie. It is very very new and I
presented this topic for top top
management at Mercedes-Benz. They were
very excited about it because this is
really the future of how to work with
data as data analyst. And this is
something
I I'm very excited about it. So let me
explain for you what is AI journey.
Um I'm not sure we are have already
three hours right
I will keep going. If you guys are tired
um then I'm sorry for it but I will keep
going. So now AI genie um the thing is
datab bricks is very smart.
They let you add your data here. And as
I told you inside your catalog, they
they stores a lot of informations. Okay,
they are storing everything about inter
like
um about your tables, the history, the
lineage, the insights. So they keep
learning, keep training on everything
happening on their platform. So they
they know which table is the most
important table in the whole company.
They know the lineage of the data. They
know the queries that you are doing.
Like all the queries I'm doing now, they
are stored somewhere in data bricks.
They know the dashboard that I just
created. They know the catalog itself.
If you add comments, if you add stuff,
they keep keep collecting collecting a
lot of statistics, a lot of metadata
about my data. And they feed their AI.
They feed the AI with all those stuff.
So with that data bricks AI going to be
smart enough to answer business
questions using LLMs using natural
language. So they have their own models.
They have a lot of models. Okay. It's
not only one.
Um it's it's um it's not only one. It is
a lot of a lot of LLMs that is used
here. The GBT the uh the one that
converts to SQL. So they are using a lot
of things in order to uh to let's say to
train all the usage all the metadata and
of course you're going to help as a data
analyst like this is the new role of of
your you as data analyst not only
building dashboards you have to help the
AI to answer the business questions
correctly. Okay. So data bricks going to
use the usage data bricks going to use
your help as a data analyst in order at
the end to answer correctly the users.
So the loop looks like this.
Um standard user going to ask the AI
genie from data bricks. It might might
make mistakes. The team I believe here
the data analyst. It's not the data
engineer. Okay. Data engineer has no
idea [laughter]
about about the usage and about the
users. We are far away guys. So it's
it's you as a data analyst. So you as a
data analyst my friend you're going to
update the meta data
of the data bricks so that genie
improves so that the AI improves and
answer people better. So that means
um yeah so the AI gen uh fundamentally
it uses two things of course.
So it uses
let me take this. So it uses the tables
that you have the data the storage and
as well it uses the same SQL warehouse
that we just used in our queries. So
nothing crazy. Okay. So it is the same
resources that we are using. So table
and storage but it going to learn it is
learning
it is learning from everything that we
do here. So there is stuff that actually
you don't have to do anything about it.
It's the logs, it is the queries, the
Unity catalog and stuff. Those are stuff
the logs especially. It's something that
is out of the box. It's going to learn
it automatically. But still as a
business user or let's say as a data
analyst I'm going to say here. Sorry. So
data analyst
or or maybe
yeah. So you still going to give
instructions to the AI. you're still
going to go and update the meta data
before we call it my friends data
steward. Okay, the we had like data
stewards that going to do the job but I
believe data stewards cannot do that. We
need a data analyst that knows exactly
the correct queries sorry and edit the
instructions. So you still have some
manual work to do in order to enhance
the AI. And then of course the business
users or the standard users whatever
standard users my friends they're going
to go and they're going to use their um
natural language. So they're going to
ask how many orders happens how many um
yeah how many customers we have and
stuff. So they're going to use their
their language to ask the AI. The AI
going to go and generate an SQL query.
SQL query.
This is very important. SQL query guys.
It's going to generate SQL query.
And that means currently [clears throat]
I don't know maybe in the future it's
going to be better, but the AI going to
generate an SQL query. It's going to be
sent to the warehouse and it's going to
get the result. Now my friends with the
SQL query you cannot do advanced
analytics you can only ask about let's
go back to this picture
if you have an SQL
you can only do this part
where is it so you can only do this part
what happens so that's why you cannot
ask the AI genie about things in the
future to tell them okay predict how
much money my company going to make in
next two years. Why the question why? It
cannot answer why. Yeah. So it will not
answer why um why we have bad sales. Why
the sales are dropping in specific? It
is not that like magic. Yeah. It will
it's just creating SQL queries. Okay. So
don't expect this is something that I I
written a guide on it in Mercedes. So
once you start using my genie
my genie
um here do not ask why. [laughter]
So that's why I don't think it's yet
there. Yeah because those people if you
give them prompts they're going to ask
why. Yeah. So that's why they generally
say oh it's it's a hard question for me.
Yeah. So you can ask only about the um
yeah the past. So do not ask why. And I
believe this needs still time but but um
it's already doing the BI word. So you
can use genie it's called as well B I AI
they they changed the name data bricks
changed the name and said this is B I AI
so that's everyone you cannot ask why
why is you still need the data
scientist. Okay. So now
um I'm going to show you how to do this
and I recommend you really to spend a
day or I don't know spend a lot of time
with this because this is really fun.
Now we're going to go to the genie
over here. Look at this. How simple to
make. So what going to do? Few clicks
new. It's like I'm building a dashboard.
Now I'm going to say uh go and grab my
data. So the fact sales create.
Now I have my data set. Okay. So again
like dashboard or query you always start
by defining which data should be used
for the AI. And believe me this is
something at work it is one of the
hardest thing to choose exactly what
should be used inside the AI. Okay. So
um yeah you can understand this once you
start using uh AI gen with a lot of
people. So now it's like guys here
you're going to give it instructions. So
maybe you're going to give it a company
name. Okay my company is so I am
YouTuber gold uh data with bar I don't
know you give it instruction. Yeah keep
the language. Um yeah, I don't want to
answer in shorts.
Um yeah, and maybe
um I don't know
use icons whatever you you give it a lot
of instructions and um you start maybe
if your data set is very complex, you
start explaining a little bit your your
data. Like for example you can say use
um
um use um always starts from the fact
table
don't go immediately dimension you can
give it some like it depends as you go
with the AI with your data you start
giving it instructions as I told you
this is the loop you give it you give it
feedback and you improve and then okay I
have to save Sorry.
Yeah. And then you can define as well
how the join should happen. Left join,
right joins and stuff. So as you can see
it is completely based as well in SQL.
So now uh what you can do here you can
give it like some example queries like
for example if a user asks um I don't
know how many orders always use this
query. So you can write as well queries
from your side as a golden queries in
order to be used from the AI. So there
is this is where you're going to work as
data analyst where you give you are
giving instruction to the AI and now I
can start giving like the user going to
go over here as as ship. Yeah. And uh
what do we have here in the data? Sorry,
I have to have a look how many orders.
Show me
total orders over the time
maybe something like this.
So now the AI is work like now what is
happening with that it is going through
the whole process. So it is trying to
see what it's learned. It's and uh it
generated an SQL query. It sent this to
the warehouse and the warehouse
answered. So now look at this. Oh no,
sorry this is here. So now I get a
prompt telling me okay you have five
orders by this day, four orders by this
day and so stuff like that. So now I can
see the results. it is written as a text
and as well I can see a table like query
and of course you can see the query that
is used so now
yeah that's why standard user cannot
evaluate whether this is correct or not
but you as that unless you can see the
query you say okay this is correct he
remove the order date he used the day
trunk as I used it yeah that day trunk
in order to go to the granularity of the
day so I think everything looks cool but
I'm going to say here Um yeah
um show total
orders by months
and now we start prompting and start
talking to the data. Um
now as you can see I see the data now by
the month. Okay. So you see here
December and January and stuff. And now
we're interesting always to check the
query. Now look at this. He's doing the
date trunk with the month. So now we are
in different granularity and this is
exactly the power of AIBI. [snorts]
So I believe in the future this going to
be your role as data analyst
your user going to go and start talking
to the data. Okay they going to start
having a chat with the data but I don't
believe you are there yet. Okay. Um so
they're going to have a chat with their
data and they going to have the results
and you as data analyst you're going to
evaluate those stuff. You're going to go
over here and say uhhuh let me see
where's the query where's the query so
let me show the query this is correct
and then you give it a thumbs up or
thumbs down or you can add it as an
instruction so here you say perfect you
have done well job so with that you are
teaching uh the AI and uh giving a
feedback and this is very important now
why this is very powerful again guys why
this is very powerful it's not a simple
AI model or LLM model that is using this
it is a huge work at data bricks to keep
learning about everything happening on
the platform. they are like there's of
course possibility for you to use yeah
some some model yeah not from data
bricks you can go and install a model in
datab bricks and you start converting
the natural language to AI uh to to
generate the skill queries but the thing
is they are investing a lot they are
investing huge number of money the data
bricks in order to make this works in
order to have this so I don't believe we
can compete with this as data scientists
I don't believe we can bring for our
users a smarter model that's allows you
to chat with your data. I believe the AI
gen going to yeah they're going to win.
It's because they are just investing of
this. Now I hope that's no one from
datab bricks here [laughter]
but they're going to generate a huge
amount of money of this guys because the
thing is
why why they are they're going to make a
lot of money of this. One of them is
using the resources. Using the resources
now let me go here
um
here. Now imagine imagine what is
happening here. Now in the company you
have yeah let's say data analyst they
are working with a writing an SQL query.
How much time it takes you to write a
query? Yeah, it takes maybe I don't know
10 minutes and maybe in the whole day
you write kind of three five queries
over the time right now how you are
generating five queries and you are
using the resources five times
now imagine if this works a standard
user is going to use their AI
each prompt
is generating a query and it is using
resources and you are paying for data
bricks So it's going to be it's going to
be amazing. Yeah. So there will be huge
usage there will be huge audience not
only not only we d that engineers and
data analysts there will be standard
users they're going to leave our leave
the whole thing and they start chatting
with the data and this of course means
consuming a lot of data so and a lot of
resources and stuff but I believe um
this is a win-win situation. It is
important that everyone in the company
to work with the big data not not that
not like the old style like uh let me
I'm closing now the loop guys
now not like the old style not like the
old style where only the very very
experts the two three people that can
work with big data can work with the
data now they are bringing everyone to
be able to work with peak data. So not
only data engineers
as well you as data analyst and now the
business users and stuff and yeah so
that's why everyone now can talk
actually with big data I presented this
uh to the higher management they were
very excited about it I rolled this out
to few users uh not to a lot in order to
practice and to add the instructions
here but um it needs time and I think
this going to your main job to add the
right comment to add the right data to
not like to help the users doing PI on
their own. Believe me, if you are a data
analyst that are hired in central IT
somewhere, you will never be able to ask
the right questions like a business
user. A business user can ask the right
questions. They know what is the
business questions and you are always
the middle guy between the business user
and the data. So they have always to ask
you to
answer the questions. So now we are
sorry to say that removing you in the
picture and you are the going to be the
one that is helping the platform helping
this to be correct because without you
as a data analyst this will not work. I
don't believe it's going to ask the
right questions here. It's going to
hallucinate. It's going to make the
wrong data. This is very simple. Yeah,
I'm showing you now sales orders. But in
processing the companies, they are very
very expens very complicated. Selecting
the right data, it's not something easy.
So there's a lot of work for you to do
in order to prepare this environment. I
don't believe a data engineer like can
do all those stuff unless they
understand the data as well. So that's
why I'm really yeah excited about this.
I wanted to show you those different
ways on how to use AI. I wanted to give
you the mindset from me not only uh yeah
you can hear me make an I'm just giving
you my thoughts process as well with
that that you can um understand what is
going on. Now I was expecting that I'm
going to build a full dashboard and
stuff but I enjoyed more taking you into
a whole process. So let me go over here
again to the module 2. I hope that I
know that you guys are tired. I'm
blabbering a lot but I hope that you are
enjoying this. Um, so now we went I
would say through everything. So not
everything I'm sorry we didn't cover the
data bricks app Power RBI and we didn't
I didn't introduce you to notebooks. So
that's why what I'm going to say we
managed to close all those topics but
what left is the PowerBI part and the uh
the notebook part. So what we're going
to do I'm going to move those two to
tomorrow with the data engineering. I'm
going to do this at the start quickly.
So I recommend you to uh to join as well
tomorrow because uh we're going to talk
about all those stuff. Um I'm going to
say there will be homeworks but you can
start with the first section. I'm ready
here. So you can go over here and do all
those steps
and uh yeah do it. Um yeah it must not
be until tomorrow. Okay I will not
control you. [laughter]
You going to do it on your own. Okay so
you can do those tasks and uh if you
have any questions ask in discord. I
will be there as well answering your
questions but tomorrow I need it in
order to prepare for a little bit for
the data engineer. That's why the
homeworks for the data analytics is
still empty.
uh once I cover both of the days I'm
going to go and add homework for you as
a data analyst and homework for you as a
data engineer. It's just to guide you on
the steps, okay? So that you remember,
okay, Abara, I did I first start the
query and then insert the dashboard and
stuff. So I'm going to put for you here
all the tasks and then you can work on
it. So but give me some time. I will
update this by the end of tomorrow
and um [snorts] yeah, I don't know. I'm
I'm happy that we managed to cover all
those points.
And I'm sorry I I was not able to read
all the shot. I'm really focused on my
mind. I'm trying to remember thing at
the work how things works um like at the
company and explain little bit for
[clears throat] you why. I hope the
language was uh not that hard. I hope
that this was slow for you. As you can
see there is a lot of things that is
going on data bricks. There's a lot of
developments. All those stuff is in the
last two years. like before two years
the whole platform looks completely
different. I didn't uh there is was no
AI gen there were no dashboards queries
and stuff like even the unity catalog
the whole unity catalog is what not
there it was only for uh data engineers
okay so now the platform is expanding
and I can tell you one of the yeah where
I worked completely I can tell you 400
projects 400 projects only using data
bricks inside one company so what I'm
going to tell you uh keep your eye in
this platform um do the tasks. Yeah,
learn it, read about it. I'm going to
add as well some uh training materials
on it.
Um let me just stop the recording
because I think I'm lagging. So now um
I'm saying do the tutorials, do a
project. Okay. Um end to end, upload
data, ask business questions, query,
make dashboard, add it to the genie, ask
questions, then put everything in one
big project. Explain everything that you
have learned from data bricks and then
show it. If you are searching for a job,
explain what you have done in data
bricks for in the interview. Tell them
maybe a little bit my mindset that I
have told you. Um show them uh get
repository where you have your queries.
Uh speak about data bricks uh at your
interviews as a skill that you have as a
data analyst. Um this is amazing if you
have of course Excel, PowerBI, those
skills are needed. I showed you like 80%
of people working with Excel. Um
standard reports. This is the most
important thing that you're going to do
in PowerBI. Learn those stuff. But give
your time this year. Give time for this
platform. Learn it. It's going to be
huge jump because now most of the data
analyst all of them are learning only
PowerBI, Excel, SQL. Okay. And you're
going to stand out the crowd if you show
ah I know about the cloud. I I work in
the cloud. I I used data bricks. Um I
can work with big companies. I can work
with um like such a scalable uh systems.
I can configure even AI. You know you
can go and and tell people you know I
configured AI. I give instructions. I
it's like a whole projects. Yeah. And
it's very easy like it's only clicks.
That's why if I were in your place as
that analyst, I'm going to show a full
use case on how I work with it. If you
have built some kind of let's say
portfolio about this, then share it with
others please because there's very few
people now are working with the data
bricks but like thousands are just using
PowerBI. Yeah, there's a lot of people
talking about PowerBI the whole day and
sharing project and stuff, but you can
start as well guiding the others. If
you've done nice projects, talk about it
in LinkedIn, share it in the community
here in Discord and maybe um yeah, share
share the channel, [laughter] of course,
if you like this kind of uh boot camps,
I enjoyed it a little bit. I'm a little
bit exhausted because I yeah, I prepared
the notion road map and then the
communications and stuff. I think I I'm
learning as well how to do this. Uh but
I enjoyed it a lot. I'm really sad that
I'm not able to read your shots all the
time, but I I will visit it after the
record. I'm gonna see all those stuff.
So, um
I hope that you guys enjoyed the boot
camp. I really enjoyed it. Maybe we can
do few questions, Q&A,
just 10 minutes, let's say, just to
check your questions. Um, I'm gonna say
let's see some questions and uh I'll try
my best to answer it. I don't have I I
wanted to use um a different app in
order to highlight the comments but I I
didn't manage to do that. That's why I
will not be able to highlight the
comments but I will try my best to
um
to maybe answer them.
Just a second. Um,
window capture
shoot.
Can I show the shots
studio YouTube?
Oh, look at this. Can I show the shots?
So now
now we can see the chat as well. Okay.
So now [clears throat]
yeah I will try to pick few questions in
order to answer. Uh sorry I will not be
able to go through all the questions but
again I'm available um every day on the
discord. I check all their their
discussions. So if you have any
questions um let me know. Now um
Okay.
Okay. Let's let's pick this question.
It's important. The difference between
snowflake and data bricks. Um
um yeah, we didn't talk about this
actually a lot about the competitors.
It's not the only platforms out there
guys datab bricks but it is the new way
on how to build data platforms to help
companies like doing data strategy.
Okay. So but datab bricks is the one
that is currently is able to cover all
the aspects.
So they are covering the data
engineering the data analytics the data
science and even now they are going to
the direction of transactional
applications.
So they want they are really want to
cover everything and this is something
that you don't have in snowflake.
Snowflake is very centralized on the
data warehouse idea
using SQL but as well using the open
format and all those stuff but they are
very focused narrow focused and um
focusing on only one topic to build uh
yeah SQL data warehouses data systems
completely using SQL and to do analytics
but the scope is very small yeah that's
why that breaks is um opening the door
for like they are working on multiple
directions at the same time and I think
they are they are winning currently but
it's it's as well a fight it is as well
a concurrence to uh data bricks I don't
know how things will goes but I see
things is moving more direct data bricks
but maybe because I worked in company
that is working with data bricks but I I
believe um it is it's winning in this
direction
so Now, um, by the way, everything that
I'm telling you, it's only my
experience. It could be I could be wrong
or something like that. So, I'm not the
one that knows everything, right?
Um,
do I have to learn ML as that engineer?
No, you don't have to do machine
learning as that engineer.
my experience in Bangalore. Oh my god
guys, I have a lot of photos and videos
in India.
Like there's a lot of things that I can
make content of. Yeah, my visit to
India. Um I enjoyed it a lot. Uh it was
it was one unique uh experience visiting
India. Uh I loved it. It was it was
amazing. I it was something that I uh I
wanted a lot. I worked with a huge team
from India like around uh yeah 50 can I
say 12 colleagues from India and we
worked a lot very hard very hard
building this data platform this data
warehouse data lake house we worked a
lot together and we spent every day
every day like 10 hours I going to say
just building building we were very
successful together but I didn't meet
meet them in person I we always talk
talk in the meetings and stuff and
finally I decided to go to India and to
visit them and it was an amazing
experience. I experienced the culture. I
experienced how they work. It's really
fun to work in India because there's
like you can make fast friendships and
stuff. Uh I I enjoyed the culture there,
how they work. And uh yeah, they had
really nice offices there, nicer as in
Germany. And yeah, there's a lot of
things too. Maybe I'm going to make one
one episode about work about India. I
spent there uh two weeks. It was
amazing. I liked it. But now I'm not
able to visit them because I left
Mercedes-Benz.
You guys are awesome Indian people. You
guys are very very nice people. Very
polite. But you have some some things
that you have to improve. You are very
shy. Like come on. You are very shy. You
have to you have to open up. You have to
be confident. You have to sh to share.
You are very shy. And this is something
that is not always a great thing at work
because a lot of you have great ideas
but you guys are afraid to say it or shy
especially if you are juniors so you
have to be more confident. Shy is good.
Um but of course very respectful very
polite so that's why I I say uh yes it
is good to be respectful to be nice but
at work sometimes you have to be harder
you have to not shy it's not work not
working at work you have to you have to
talk you have to challenge you have to
do stuff so but you guys are really shy
and uh I think once you get to be a
senior or a little bit older then you
start being like more talkative
I hired in my project a lot of juniors
that engineers they are we're all shy
all like not talking a lot and this I
need uh in projects uh a lot of times a
lot of inputs from the developers and if
the developer is shy and not talking
this is not really good but in the other
side uh it was very respectful I I liked
it a lot and um yeah I hope that I can
visit you again so uh you brought the
topic But [laughter]
um let's talk about
um another questions.
Um okay, data fabric.
Data fabric and data bricks. uh data
fabric it is um yeah I I've done one of
my project at the start using uh
Microsoft products uh like the synaps
and um the data factory
and all their Microsoft tools in the
Azure I didn't like it it is not
something that you can do in order to
build an enterprise big projects because
it is all about
like if you want to make small project
it's fine but they are not thinking
big okay and I don't believe datab
bricks is going to be a solution to be
uh data sorry not data bricks data
fabric I don't think it's going to be a
solution for an enterprise a big company
because they are not focusing on the
right topics and I'm not a fan of that
that's why I I don't believe that a
fabric
it's going to be um um yeah has like a
big future compared to data bricks
because the data factory tool is not
really good tool uh compared to the
pipelines using workflows in data bricks
it it's like the
the the way that Microsoft do their
their yeah their tools is that they
build bring one tool and then they maybe
over the time they forget about it or
they don't focus on it and stuff so you
cannot really count on it um I'm going
to say they have done an amazing job
Microsoft by making the the Azure
platform by making the PowerBI but I
don't like their ETL tools. I don't like
their um services and I don't believe
that the fabric or whatever the name
they bring in the future that's going to
survive
and uh yeah it's not for professionals
so you cannot uh you cannot do that.
Um,
what all should we learn to get data
brick certified data analyst like the
other than what we teach? Well, in order
to get certified, you have to of course
do the exam
and enroll. But uh to get certified from
data bricks, yeah, you have to train
yourself. you have to learn to get
yourself familiar with all what I've
explained today. Go through maybe the
notion road map and try to train. The
thing is if you get the training from
data bricks uh they offer a lot of free
stuff by the way. So always I'm going to
say subscribe for their stuff. You can
make as well boot camps with data bricks
and start learning. Uh so I recommend
you to as well to yeah check what they
offer for free and if you have enough
money then go and buy their courses and
stuff. It's it's pretty expensive but uh
it worth it. Yeah. If you want to get
certified uh then you can learn
everything on your own. Join all those
boot camps like now I'm doing. Go and
check the Alex the analyst as well. He
done two hours as well introduction to
data bricks. So check the other
YouTubers
but the best way is to do your own
project. So you bring your data set try
with all those tools and then yeah
you're going to learn it on your own. I
I didn't do any courses to learn data
bricks. So I just learned it on my own
reading the documentations stuff and I
think you can get certified very easily.
Yeah. From data bricks but I don't give
certifications here if you join like my
data academy and stuff we give you um
the completion. Yeah. And it's not that
it's always big difference between
completion of the certificates and the
certificate directly from data bricks or
from Microsoft or from PowerBI. They
have more weights. Well, this is against
my my platform, but this is um uh let's
say um
yeah,
getting certificates from uh data bricks
is going to be way easier. So guys, I'm
going to say um
what other tools are important for data
engineering? You can do the whole thing
only in data bricks. I'm going to say um
you could learn like I don't know data
factory if you want to add from Azure or
you start yeah learning the other
platforms but um I made the full road
map on data by the way that engineering
road map going to come on Tuesday it's
going to be full step by step on what to
learn to become that engineer like
better than me okay so [snorts] now I'm
going to say guys I really enjoyed uh
this session I have to stop because I
want to take a
So I enjoyed a lot this session. I think
I'm going to make more over the time
free one like this not only for data
bricks yeah for powerbi and maybe only
just chatting with you uh give me time
to learn how to do the stream correctly.
Okay. So I am going to bring more tools
and by the way there is one more thing I
might bring few people from the industry
to have a have a talk to like I knew a
lot I knew a lot of like experts in that
engineering and analytics and I want
them to get here in the stream and to
have a chat with them so that you
understand their mindset and how they
think and you can ask them directly
questions. So I'm going to work on that
and other than that uh I'm going to say
thank you so much. Thank you. Thank you
so much. I read all your comments. I
read uh everything in discord. Sadly I
am not be able now to answer everyone. I
enjoyed the first phase in in YouTube
where only like few of you watching my
videos. I was able to like answer
everyone of you but now I am able only
to read them and to give hurt and um
trying to involve in discussion in
discord because it is easier and I can
like uh uh I can get engaged with you.
So the community is in discord and uh I
love everyone there. They are really
amazing people. I see your comments.
Your support is amazing for me. It is
like I never expected this. Thank you so
much for the support guys. You can do
anything you like you can dream of. So
keep learning, keep pushing. Uh the uh
even the job is horrible now job market
but you can get hired and you can work
on all those tools and uh yeah share
your knowledge. Share your knowledge is
very important. So if you done something
nice in datab bricks, share it in
LinkedIn, share it with others. I love
you all. Uh thank you so much for
watching. I hope that was good for you.
And uh yeah, I'm going to say see you
tomorrow in that engineering and have a
nice day. Bye-bye. Sleep well.
So,