Hey friends, so now we're going to speak
about the most important chapter in the
whole PowerBI, the data moduling.
Because if data moduling is weak in your
project, everything else going to suffer
and fail. So in this chapter, we're
going to do a full deep dive into data
moduling in PowerBI, but the right way.
>> There's a right way to do this.
>> So I'm going to do it with you carefully
step by step as usual with the
fundamentals using sketches and then we
deep dive as we progress. So now let's
get started. All right. Right. So now
let's have a look to the main faces the
main components in PowerBI. So we start
by connecting the data from the sources
and after that we transform it using
power query and then we build the data
model and on top of it we write DAX
calculations. Then the next step we
start building visuals report and
dashboard and share it with the others.
So now by looking to this we have like
clear separation between like backend
work and front-end work. But now what
happened in real PowerBI projects in
many companies is that people try to
skip things in the back end and jump
immediately to the front- end things
because building visuals are more fun
right colors, charts, dashboards and it
is the thing that the end users can see
from you. So they try to speed up the
backend process and especially one thing
they skip the data moduling. So they
might do some transformations in Power
Query, build some DAX but the data model
step it is totally skipped and this is
my friends where many PowerBI projects
start to fail over the time. So
everything in the projects going to
start be heavy, expensive, slow and hard
to maintain and I can tell you many
stories about this at work. I got
invited many times to save PowerBI
projects that are suffering and failing.
So they ask me to review the project and
suggest fixes in order to save it. And I
can tell you after reviewing and
auditing the whole project almost all of
them are doing the same mistake. They
are skipping the data moduling. They are
really huge projects but they rush it.
So they go immediately from the sources
and start building visualizations and
dashboard and over the time they start
failing. So in many cases we just build
the data model and save the project. But
there were some projects where it was
too late and they died over the time. So
data modeling is very important and I
understand why this happens because data
modeling can feel hard and many courses
out there they just show you simple star
schema and they move on to the next
steps but with me we will not do that
>> I will not be beat
up
>> so now let's start with the mindset and
understand why data modeling is so
important and if you skip it everything
going to fail let's go
>> let's get the party started
>> let's get the party started
>> okay so it start like this someone going
to ask you for a new report and you
going to Start connecting the data and
create one big flat table with all
columns that are needed. Then you start
adding some DAX calculations. Build the
report and then share it with the user.
So that's it. And this might takes like
maybe one or to two weeks. At the start
you're going to feel that everything
looks fine and you're going to feel that
you are fast and flexible. But PowerBI
projects don't stay small. The data
going to grow. You're going to get more
requests to extend their report. You're
going to get more users are using it.
and you're going to start feeling things
are getting like out of control because
this one table my friend it is not a
data model and it going to cause a lot
of issues. So now the first issue is all
about the size. Things might work if you
have like 10,000 rows you won't feel the
problem but if the sources are like
providing 100k or million 10 million
rows you're going to feel the issue.
This one table going to get bigger very
fast because the same information like
the product name, customer name is
repeated over and over which going to
make the whole PowerBI heavy for no good
reason. Instead of storing the product
name only once, you are storing it
thousands or millions of times. So the
size of your one table going to grow
very fast. And this going to lead my
friend to many other issues like the
performance. And here two things going
to get slow. First performance issue is
the load process from the source to
powerbi. So refreshing the model going
to move quickly from few minutes into
half hour or hour. So it's going to be
painful to bring a new data to the
powerbi. And the other performance issue
is the report performance. PowerBI going
to need more time to scan the one big
table to build the visualizations, the
filters and to react to the interaction
from the end user. So your report going
to be slow your users going to suffer
and I can tell you in real projects if
the report doesn't open in like two or 3
seconds your users going to say you know
what the whole project is slow and
they're going to start complain about
it. So performance issue going to be
everywhere. Now we come to another big
issue the ducks. I met a lot of people
in projects that think ducks is
complicated or they are bad at ducks but
actually this is not the problem. The
one big table forcing them to write
complicated formulas and calculations in
DAX. The rule is very simple. Bad data
model going to lead to bad complicated
ducks because of not having a data model
and having one table. A simple measure
that should take only one line becomes
10 lines because you have to twist
things in order to get the right
results. So having no model going to be
the issue for the size, the performance
and ducks. Now what is the solution is
of course to build a data model. So that
means we stop putting everything in one
big table. We split the data into
meaningful tables and connect them with
the relationships. This going to solve
all those issues because it going to
make the model smaller. So the same
product information or the customer
information will not keep repeating
because of the sales. So the text is not
repeated for no reason million of times.
The size going to stay small and this of
course means you're going to have good
performance. So you can load a new data
to PowerBI. you can refresh faster and
as well the performance of your reports
going to be faster. Like for example, if
you have a slicer in the report, PowerBI
doesn't have to go and scan one big
table. Instead, it's going to go and
read one small dimension table which can
be way faster to build the visual for
your users and as well because of having
relationships between those tables,
ducks can become easy. So the data model
and the relationships going to do big
part of the work and your calculations
on ducks can become smaller and easier.
So those are the big wins and the first
reasons why we need a data model. But
there is another problem. Now the thing
is if you skip building solid data
models and you go with the one table
this going to lead over the time to very
bad habit or let's say bad system design
that going to be the main reason of why
your project is meant to fail. And by
the way I saw this in many projects at
companies. Now the thing is you will not
build like only one report and that's it
at companies. You will get requirements
to build another report, another
dashboard. And now since you don't have
a data model and you just build one
tailored table. This going to lead you
to build another one table for the new
requirements for the new reports. So
you're going to do the whole process
from the scratch. Connecting data,
building one table, building one
dashboard, and then sharing it with a
user. And this what this design going to
continue. So you're going to get a new
requirement for new reports. And you're
going to do the same thing over and
over. One table for one report. And my
friends if your project start looking
like this one table one report then I
can tell you this going to be the
beginning of the end of your project.
Now let me tell you why. Now for you the
one that is building the project this
going to be a nightmare to maintain. So
let's say that you found an issue in the
transformations or you want to change
something because you got a new
requirement. Now what going to happen?
You're going to go to all PowerBI files
and start editing this one table one by
one. And you're going to try your best,
of course, to do the same thing over and
over to have the sync between those
transformations. But I can tell you this
is a lost battle because one day you're
going to forget to update one of them.
So one small change going to be a lot of
work for you. It's going to become days
or weeks until you finish. So really
hard to maintain. And this going to lead
as well to another issue. your
calculations and transformations going
to start be different from one report to
another. And this is a big issue not
only for you but as well for the
business for the users because now your
reports are showing different numbers.
In one report you show the sales as 1.2
million and another report could show
the sales 1.4 million. At the end it is
the same thing. It is a sales but you're
going to calculate it differently in all
those files. And I can tell you when
your users going to start seeing that
the numbers are not matching, they will
stop trusting the whole PowerBI project.
They will not see that the data model is
wrong. They're going to see okay the
whole PowerBI tool or let's say the
whole project is wrong. And this is
exactly the turning point. This is how
projects starts to fail to die where
people stop using the dashboard and they
go back to their old tools using Excel.
Now of course the question is what is
the solution? Of course, building a
solid data model. Now, the thing is one
big table is usually built and tailored
around one reports. But once you start
thinking in models, you go and start
building things around the business. So
you got to say, okay, we need a sales,
we need products, customers, dates and
connect them together. You are not
tailoring anything for a report. You are
actually building a solid model for the
business that can answer analytical
questions. So naturally you're going to
start reusing this model for multiple
reports because usually the next reports
are for the same business. So what I'm
trying to say here is once you start
building data models you start thinking
how this model can serve multiple
reports and this is a big win if your
project start looking like this. First
of all it is easier to maintain. You're
going to be very fast. So if you found
any issue or you want to change the
logic of something you go to one place
and do that and your change or your fix
going to affect all the reports so it is
easy to maintain and not only that this
going to automatically force standards
and consistency. So you're going to have
less chance of having different numbers
in different reports. So that means your
projects going to have better chance to
survive and be solid for many other use
cases. So this is I'm going to say a
bigger reason why we need data moduling
in PowerBI projects. And now we come to
some reality check or let's say some
people going to push back on this and
going to say hey this going to looks
really good on paper but in real
projects it will never work because
different reports have different
requirements and if everything depends
on one shared model then changes one
thing going to become really scary. So
you're going to feel like I might break
something if I change the calculation
because all reports are using it at
once. Well, I'm going to be honest. This
is totally fair. This is what's going to
happen. If you build one giant shared
data model for everything, we will not
do that. Of course, you will not build
for one company, one model. You will be
creating shared model by subject area,
by domain. One model for the sales
reports, one model for the finance,
another one for the HR report. So,
you're going to get like a group of
reports that are using one model. Things
going to looks like this. For each
domain, you're going to have multiple
reports and one model. And if your
project is getting bigger and bigger,
you're going to have multiple models. So
that means we will be in the middle. So
we will not go and create like one table
for each report. And at the same time,
we will not try to force one model for
the whole company. Now let's have a
recap why data modeling is important
because bad modules going to create
technical problems, very big PowerBI
files, slow reports, hard to refresh and
complex ducks. and as well bad moduling
going to also create project problems,
repeated work, hard maintenance,
different KBI numbers and users losing
trust. So I hope with this you have now
enough arguments why you have to take
time to do data moduling. Maybe you have
to go and now convince one of your
managers or your project. If you skip
it, your report might work for now, but
over the time you have high risks of
failing. [music]
So now what is data modeling in PowerBI?
Now first of all the data model it is a
structure that describes the business
data and how the pieces are actually
related to each others. What this
exactly means? Now data modeling it is a
process that looks like this. You're
going to have a look to your data. It
could be chaotic inside files, inside
databases or in one big file. And inside
it you're going to have like mix of
business objects, sales, products,
customers, dates. Now you're going to
look at it and then decide what is the
best structure for it. And here you
decide for two reasons. First for the
business. So you're going to go and
start organizing the data into clear
business objects. Like you're going to
say okay all the sales data going to go
in one place. Then you split and take
all the products in another table. Same
things for customers and dates. So you
start splitting your data and put it in
places based on the business itself. Now
the second reason why you want to bring
a structure for it, it is for the tool
that you are using like for example
PowerBI. We want to shape the data in a
way that PowerBI can work efficiently
and correctly so that you get nice
response and fast performance. That
means our goal is to look to the
original data and think about how to
reshape it for those two goals. Split it
into tables based on the business and
split it in order to get good
performance for the tool that you are
using. We are not splitting things
randomly. We have a plan.
>> My plan a man pan.
>> Now the next step in data modeling is to
decide how to connect those tables with
relationships. Relationship it is as
well a description that can explain how
those tables relate to each others. And
the final third component in data
modeling we define the calculation on
top of the model like the total sales
the average profits the total number of
orders number of customers all those
calculations and in PowerBI we do those
calculations using DAX. So that means
the model is not just like one table or
one object. It is three parts that work
together. Tables to store the data
relationships in order to connect those
tables and calculations in order to
answer business questions. All right. So
this is the data moduling and now let's
go and focus on tables because in data
modeling tables can have different
shapes different roles depend on the
moduling technique. In techniques like
for example the data vault the tables
can have the role of hubs links
satellites bridge. So different like
let's say styling and in operational
systems the tables might take the shape
of an object or let's say play the role
of relationships and link but in PowerBI
things a little bit easier because we
are building for analytical reports and
the most important moduling style or
technique it is the dimensional
moduling. So in this technique the
tables might take one of those two
shapes fact tables and the dimension
tables. And now let's deep dive into
those two and start with the first one
the fact table. So what is that? A fact
table stores business events,
transactions or activity that we can use
in order to calculate something. So now
what this exactly means? Let's have this
example. So now here we have a sales
table. Now what we do? We have a deep
look to the data in order to understand
the behavior or what this table is
trying to tell us. Now first of all we
can see the table is recording something
that happened to the business and what
happened here a sale did happen. So
there is like an event. The second thing
that you're going to see it might
include a lot of ids those going to be
like a link to another thing another
table. Now another pattern you're going
to find informations about the date and
time like an order date an invoice date
transaction date. So you're going to
find informations about when this event
did happen. And the last pattern that
you're going to find here, we have
numbers like quantity, sales, discount,
cost or profit. All those numbers going
to help us to calculate something. So if
you see all those together, so an event,
ids to something else, information about
the date and time and a lot of numbers,
then my friend you are looking at a fact
table. This table is just recording the
business activity. So this is the first
type, the fact tables. Now let's talk
about the second type. We have the
dimensions. A dimension table stores
descriptive informations that gives the
context to the facts. Of course, we have
to understand what this means. Look at
this table. It is storing the products
informations. And you can see each one
row is actually representing one
product. So that means the row here is
not like an event or like we are
recording something happened. It is just
describing a business object like the
product. Now the second thing that
you're going to notice that we have a
lot of attributes informations that is
describing this product like the product
name, the category, the brand, the
color, the status. So they are just
adding more context to the product. And
now by looking to this you can
understand those columns are really
important in reports. So we could use
one of those columns in order to do data
filtering in order to focus only on
small subset or we could use one of
those informations to make a group of
numbers in our reports. Like for
example, we can take the categories and
we can build something like the sales by
category. So that means this information
the category going to help us to group
up the sales number and this is of
course the core thing in building
visualizations and reports. So if you
have a table like this where we are
describing one business object like the
products or maybe the customers and we
have a lot of columns that are adding
more and more context and they look
amazing in order to build a filter or to
use it in order to group the numbers
then my friends you are looking at a
dimension table. So this is exactly what
we mean with the second type the
dimensions. All right so now let's
compare those two quickly side by side.
The fact tables record what happens.
Dimension tables describe what happened.
The core of the facts are usually dates
and numbers in order to do calculations.
The core of the dimensions, they are
usually the labels that we use to
analyze those numbers. Like for example,
sales by category. The sales are numbers
that comes from the fact. But the
category, it is the label, the context,
it comes from the dimension. So the fact
answers what happened. It is like an
event and transaction. A dimension
answers who, what, where and when. So it
is the description, it is the context.
So actually that's it. Once you
understand those two then data modeling
become much easier to understand and as
well to build. Okay. So now by looking
back to our data model with that we have
the two main tables facts and
dimensions. And now of course the
question is how to connect them. This of
course going to lead us to a very famous
shape called the star schema. A star
schema means we have a fact table that
sits in the middle and we have all those
dimension tables that connect around it.
So the fact sales is in the middle and
around it we have a products, customers,
date, store and look at this, it is
forming the shape of the star, right?
That's why we call it star schema. And
this is our target in data modeling. We
want to get this shape. And my friends,
PowerBI just love star schema. It works
very well with this shape and of course
you might ask why. Well, there are many
reasons like for example it gives
PowerBI a clean way to filter the data.
So all those dimensions around the fact
they're going to go and filter the
central table the fact that holds the
numbers and of course all those
relationships going to help PowerBI to
understand how the filter should move.
So for example if you are filtering the
products this has an effect on the
numbers like for example the sales. Same
thing if you filter the customers this
going to automatically filter the sales
and for all other dimensions. And now
because of filter logic is so simple DAX
going to become as well much easier to
write. So all what you have to write now
is just like for example the total sales
is equal to sum of sales. We don't have
to write any complex DAX calculations
because we have a clean data model that
is supporting it. The model already know
how products customers and dates are
connected to the sales. So you don't
have to repeat it in the calculation.
And not only that as well, it's going to
make building the visuals much easier
for you and as well for PowerBI. So
you're going to have this mental mode in
your head to say, okay, if I'm building
the visuals, I need numbers and you go
immediately to the middle to the fact
and if you want to group it up by
something, then you look at the
dimensions to get a label. Same thing if
you want to build a slicer, you usually
go and look to the dimensions. So that
means star schema gonna gives you a
clean starting point to build any
visual. So actually that's it. This is
the star schema.
>> So shoot for the stars. Okay. All right.
>> Fact in the middle dimensions around it.
Relationships from the dimensions to the
facts. The facts going to hold the
activities the numbers the dimension
going to give the context and the
filters. So this is exactly why star
schema is amazing not only for PowerBI
but as well for other BI tools like for
example Tableau. And now the thing is we
don't have only one methods on how to
module the data for PowerBI but as well
we have another thing that you might
hear snowflake schema and the galaxy
schema. So what are those stuff in real
projects what might happen that one of
your dimensions in the star schema start
getting bigger and bigger over the time.
Not only you are getting more data and
rows but as well you are adding more
columns over the time. So your dimension
gets really big and here you decide to
go and split it into two dimensions. So
now for example instead of having one
dimension for the products you're going
to go and split it into two dimensions
one for the products and one for the
category. And now what you do after
splitting usually you go and connect
them and build relationship between
them. So that means the relationship is
not only between the dimension and fact
but as well you can have it between one
dimension and another dimension. And
this might happen to another dimension
and so on and you start splitting and
over the time this star schema going to
looks like a snowflake schema. So it
looks like snowflake. Now if you work
with those two and compare them side by
side you're going to understand that the
snowflake schema it is more complex. You
have more relationships to manage. You
have to write a ducks that is suitable
for the snowflake. And now PowerBI might
get a little bit slower because it's
going to go and connect a lot of tables
until it reach the fact table. But of
course on the other hand the snowflake
going to help you reducing the size of
the model. So if your PowerBI file is
really big one, you can go and split it
and use the snowflake in order to reduce
the size of it. So I worked with those
two and I can tell you I try most of the
time to avoid using the snowflake and
try as a default to use the star schema
because it is just simple and only in
extreme cases I go and split a dimension
into two and okay we call it now
snowflake. So snowflake is the second
type of data modeling but actually we
have a third one that called galaxy.
Sounds fancy right?
>> I say chiao cuz I'm fancy from
Tallahassee. So what this means now this
time the dimension is not a problem but
the fact in many scenarios in real
projects you will not have like only one
perfect fact that's going to serve all
the reports you might end up having more
than one fact like for example you have
one for the sales and another one for
the budget. Now the thing is you need
both in order to build one big dashboard
and those two facts are sharing the same
dimensions like for example fact sales
is using the dimension product and same
thing going to happen the fact budget
going to need as well the dimension
products. So with this we have the
product as a shared dimension between
two facts. So actually that's it. If
your model going to look like this then
my friends you have a galaxy. But here
be very careful. This is very common
mistake that done in data moduling. We
never connect the fact tables together.
They going to get connected through a
shared dimension. Of course, this is
very important topic and at the same
time very advanced. We're going to leave
it later in the chapters. But now for
you just have the sounding that we have
star schema. This is the most common and
default data modeling that we do in PI
and analytics. Then we have a snowflake.
If you have an issue with big dimensions
and you want to split and normalize, by
the way, if I say normalize, that means
we are just splitting big tables into
smaller tables. And the third one, the
galaxy, if you have multiple facts that
are sharing the same dimensions. Now,
just quick clarification about the terms
that you might hear in PowerBI projects
at work. You're going to hear people
saying data set, semantic model, data
model. At the end, it is all the same
data set. It is just an old terminology
used by Microsoft PowerBI and now they
are calling it semantic model. The data
model it's like people like me I use it
as official term. It is the process not
only in PowerBI but as well in any like
platform that you are building that has
to do with data. So if you hear all
those terms don't worry about it. Just
keep this in your head. The report is
the visual layer and the model is what
sits behind the report and they can call
it whatever they want. Okay. So now
let's do a quick recap for everything
that we have learned today. A data model
it is the way that we structure our data
for two reasons. In order to build
business objects and as well to make a
clear structure for the tool that we are
using like PowerBI it is made of three
components tables relationships and
calculations on top of those tables. And
now since PowerBI is a BI tool
analytical tool then the tables usually
have two important roles. Either it's
going to be a fact table or a dimension.
Fact table going to record what happens.
So they are events. Dimensions they
going to describe what happened. So it
is the context and it going to help us
to filter and group the numbers. And
when we connect the dimensions around
the fact then we're going to get the
shape of the star schema. This is the
foundations of building PowerBI models.
So everything going to be easy for
PowerBI in order to filter data and as
well to write a DAX calculations and if
one of your dimensions are getting
bigger we split it into two dimensions
then we connect them together and with
that you're going to get the snowflake
schema or in other scenario if you have
more than one fact that are sharing the
same dimension then you have a galaxy.
All right, my friends. So, with this,
I'm really happy that now you have a
solid foundations about data modeling in
PowerBI in order to start really
practicing. And this is exactly what
we're going to do in the next video.
We're going to take a row table build
full star schema end to end in order to
practice all those concepts.
Hey friends, [music] so now we're going
to speak about the technical part of
data modeling in PowerBI. It will not be
easy. So, I need your full focus. Now
the thing is PowerBI is very advanced in
data moduling and as well very
sensitive. That means not only making a
bad decision in big topic like how to
module the data in star schema,
snowflake and so on could lead to bad
performance and bad results as well a
tiny small mistake that you decide in
the data model like for example the
cardinality on a relationship between
two tables could lead to bad numbers and
bad results. So that's why it is not an
easy topic to learn and to be honest to
teach. You have to do a lot of projects
in order to understand the different
scenarios and why we do those decisions.
Now I'm going to do my best to bring all
the scenarios that I had in my projects
as a scenarios in this course. So now
let's get started.
>> Going speed. Here we go.
>> All right. So now let's start with the
foundations in PowerBI. We have all
those different layers. And we're going
to focus now into two layers together.
The module and the visual layer. So
let's zoom in. The visual layer it is
the place where you're going to go and
build your report. So usually you have
like maybe two tables and you pick one
of them and start drag and drop to the
visual to build maybe a table or a
charts a card and PowerBI going to just
show the visual. But now what going to
happen if you go to another table and
drag and drop inside the same visual.
Now PowerBI going to say okay but wait
how I'm going to go and combine those
two different data from two different
tables in one visual. So PowerBI need
from you more infos in order to combine
the data and we cannot define the logic
in the visual layer. We have to do it in
the engine in the previous layer the
module layer. There we're going to
define everything the shape of the
tables how the tables are related to
each others using relationships the
cardinality the filtering the
calculations how the data going to move
from one table to another define the
security rules. So PowerBI going to find
all the rules, all the description about
how everything is related to each others
and how PowerBI going to go and deal
with those two informations in the
visual. And based of all those
informations in the module layer,
PowerBI going to have all the knowledge
in order to calculate the numbers and
plot charts in the visual layer. And
here is the most important thing to
understand. If the numbers are wrong in
the visual layer, it is highly likely
because the rules, the shapes, the
relationships on the module layers are
wrong. So bad model going to define bad
rules that going to lead to bad numbers.
And of course, my friends, don't expect
if you make mistakes on the module layer
that you're going to find big error
message in the visual in the reports.
No, mostly the report going to function.
You're going to see numbers, your
visuals are working, everything is okay.
Only if you or your users make zoom in
and start really checking the numbers,
they might start seeing those wrong
numbers. So mostly the mistakes going to
lead to silent errors that it is really
hard to find. But don't worry about it.
We're going to start with the
foundations. Now it always start like
this. In my data I have two tables left
and right. And I'm going to need both of
them in my reports. And here my friends,
you have two options, not only one.
Either you're going to go and combine
those two tables together into one
single table like we have done in power
query by merging the tables into one.
They are physically now one table. Or
the other option that you say you know
what let's just leave them as it is. So
we will not go to power query and do
anything. We will just like put a line a
relationship between those two
physically they're going to start
separated from each others but they have
a relationship between them. So this is
the first decision that you have to make
either in barquery you are merging or
building relationships in the module
layer. Now of course we are focusing on
the relationships. So what are they? A
relationship it is like a contract
between two tables in order for you to
define the rules that going to tell
PowerBI how to filter and how to combine
the data from those two tables into one
visual in the front end. And now you
might say wait you said relationships we
don't combine data only merging in power
query we combine. So now we are
combining actually in relationships. So
what is going on? What is going on? Now
let's zoom out again the three layers
power query module layer and visual
layer. Now if you merge two tables it's
going to happen at the beginning in the
start in the power query. So everything
going to be merged together the columns
the rows into one single table. And of
course in the next layers the module the
visual you're going to see only one
single table. So that means combining
the data happens in very early stage in
the power query. But now in the other
side if you go to the module layer and
build a relationship between those two
tables they will not get combined. They
going to stay separated. So that means
in module and as well in visual layer
you're going to see the original two
tables. But only if you go and build a
chart a visual in the visual layer and
you start picking data from left and
right only there the data going to get
combined and of course not all columns
not all rows this depends on what you
picked and what filters you are using.
Now of course you're going to say okay
when we combine in power query and when
we build relationships the rule is very
simple. If two tables are describing the
same row like for example you have
customer info and customer emails
separated in two different tables then
no need to build a relationships just go
and combine them at early stage in the
power query. But if you have two
different tables like for example the
sales and the customers it would be bad
idea to go and combine them together
instead build a relationship between
them. Those are the two options and the
first decision that you have to make.
But now we have more things. Now in
order to build a relationship between
two tables, you have to define for
PowerBI three things. First you have to
define the keys. They are common columns
between two tables like ids, keys or
whatever. So that PowerBI know how to
match the rows between those two tables.
Without it, PowerBI has no idea how to
combine the rows. Another thing you have
to define the cardality. Yes, a fancy
name. So you have to describe the values
inside those keys. And here we have two
options that we have to define for each
side. It is very simple. One means the
values are unique. There is no
repetitions. And other value many means
the values are repeating. They are not
unique. And one value can appear
multiple times. So that means we have
two options, two sides. That means we
have four cardinality options. Yes, I
can do math.
>> Hey Michael, what's 394
* 5,912?
>> Let's see. We have one to one, one to
many, many to one and the evil and the
one, the only many to many relationship.
This is going to be the real sufferer.
Okay. So let's have very simple example.
We start with the onetoone relationship.
So here we have two tables about the
customers. One has the names, the other
has the tiers and they are connected
using the customer ID. Now let's go and
check the values inside the keys. We can
see on the left side the keys are
unique. For each customer we have
exactly one row. That's why the
relationship on the left side is one.
Now let's go and check the right side.
We have the exact same thing. Values of
the customer ID is unique. There are no
duplicates. And as well on the right
side is going to be one. So that's it.
This is the one to one relationship. Now
let's have an example about the one to
many relationship. So on the left side
we have the customers again. And on the
right sides we have the orders. Now same
thing. We're going to check the values
inside the keys. On the customers we
don't have duplicates. So they are all
unique. But on the right side we have
duplicates. So for the first customer,
Maria did place two orders. So on the
left side it is one. On the right side
it is many. It exist more than once.
Let's try out Joan. Same thing. On the
left side one. On the right side many.
But of course this is not must. Like for
example Anna she ordered only once. But
since we have duplicates from other
customers this relationship going to be
one to many. Now the many to one it's
exactly the same but we just like flip.
So if the dimension now on the right
side we say it is many to one
relationship. So the same thing we are
just like flipping the sides nothing
new. Okay. Now we come to the many to
many relationship and here we have two
tables. On the left side we have the
customer segments and on the right side
we have the orders the sales. Same thing
they are connected using the customer
ID. But now if you have a look to this
you can see the customer ID is not
anymore unique on the left side. So a
customer could belong to multiple
segments and on the right side the fact
it was normal because a customer could
order multiple things. So that means if
I click to one of those customers same
effect they go and like order multiple
things but now here is the issue one
order belongs now to two rows on the
left side because the customer belong to
two segments. So that means the left
side is not anymore one it is many and
with that we have many to many
relationship. So we have to define the
rules on that cardality. Another thing
that you have to define is the filter
direction. Now in reporting we filter
data like crazy and we have to define
the direction of how the filter going to
move from one table to another and
whether it is allowed and in order to
control the traffic of the filters we
have as well some options. So now again
we have this simple example where we
have two tables the sales and the
segments and for each table we have like
an aggregation for the segments we have
the total number of segments and here we
have the total number of sales. Now one
option to define the direction of the
filters to say it is single filter from
the left to the right. So for example if
I go and filter the data for the
customer ID you can see the sales is
already filtered with the total but as
well the right side is filtered. So we
have here only two segments. Same thing
if I go and filter the data by another
customer you can see it always has an
effect on the right side. So whatever
I'm filtering on the left the filter is
going to the right side. But now if I go
and start filtering from the right side,
you can see okay the table is filtered.
We have only two segments. But this
filter has no effect on the sales. I'm
still seeing the total number of sales.
So the filter is not traveling from the
right side to the left side. Same thing
if I go and select the other customers.
You can see the sales table is not
affected. Now of course we can do the
opposite where we can say single filter
from segments to the sales. So this time
if I filter on the segments it's going
to filter the sales. But now of course
if I filter the sales there's no effect
on the right side. Now if you say you
know what let's have it free for all
everything filter everything. For that
we're going to use the both. So that
means if I'm filtering on the left side
the data going to get filtered on the
right side. And the same thing if I'm
filtering on the right side the data are
getting filtered on the left side. So
wherever I'm filtering it going to go
everywhere. So as you can see my friends
with this we can control the behavior of
the whole data model how the data is
filtered and this has a great effect on
the reports. So those are the three
rules that we have to define on the
relationships the keys cardalities and
the filter direction. And guess what we
will not do this only between two
tables. We have to do it for the whole
data model. Each time you connect two
tables you have to define those. And if
you do it wrong you're going to get
wrong results. All right my friends. So
now enough with the sketches and the
theory. Let's go back to PowerBI and
practice. [music]
All right, new [music] start blank
report and we are on the model view. Of
course, what do we need? We need data.
So we're going to go and connect a CSV
files. Here I have prepared some facts
and dimensions. We're going to start
with the fact sales. So let's go and
load it. As usual, we're going to get a
preview. Okay, load. Now you can see we
have something new. We have a card
inside the model. This is the fact sales
and inside it we have a lot of columns.
You can go and expand it if you want but
if you want to hide all those details
you can go and minimize it. So this is
our fact. Now if you click on it you're
going to find here on the right side
some options like for example in the
properties you can go and rename your
fact. You can go and add a description.
We have some synonyms. So we can call it
fact sales sales facts and so on. This
is important for the PowerBI Q&A. If the
user like ask okay give me the sales.
PowerBI knows okay the sales means the
fact table. Same thing for the row label
as well for the Q&A and the last one you
can go and define the key column but for
now we will not define anything. So as
you can see some few metadata about our
new table. Now if you go to the advanced
this is all about the load modes since
it is a file it is an import. Now on the
right side in the data pane we have here
two tabs the tables. It is a nice way to
see the tables and the columns inside
it. And if you go to the model, this is
another way on how to present the data
model for us. Like for example, we can
go to the tables over here and we're
going to see like a list of all our
tables. In our model, we have a lot of
things. So we have tables,
relationships, we have measures. So here
PowerBI tried to group the different
things inside our model by topics. With
that, you get a nice overview of the
whole data model. So this is the
interface about modeling in PowerBI. It
is really advanced compared to other
tools. Now we don't have yet a data
model. We have only the fact sales.
That's why we're going to go and connect
for it another table. Usually, we go and
connect a dimension. So, let's go and do
that. I'm going to go and pick the
dimension customers. All right, let's go
and load it. Okay, once it's done, we
have a new card inside our data model
for the dimension customer and we can
move it around, but we keep the fact
table in the center. So, we have a new
dimension and you can see we have
already a relationship between those two
tables. So this nice line means those
two tables are connected and PowerBI yes
do it automatically. Now as a default if
you add new table inside the model
PowerBI going to go and investigate all
the data inside this new table
everything the values the uniqueness and
as well the column names and once it
finds a possibility to connect this new
table to the whole model it going to go
and do that. So it is a suggestion from
PowerBI that is based on the data. It's
not like a random guess from PowerBI. Uh
this is of course a nice thing if you
have small data model but once the model
gets bigger and bigger this might be
annoying because PowerBI always try to
connected to all other tables and what's
happen you're going to end up like
cleaning up all those relationships and
start over from the scratch. So if you
have a small model leave it as it is but
if you have a big data model you can go
to the options and deactivate it. So now
in order to learn how to create a
relationship, we're going to go and
delete this one over here. So if you
just select it and hit delete, you can
go and remove it. Now in order to
recreate it, you have like multiple
options. Either you're going to go to
the manage relationships over here in
the ribon. So if you click on it, you
can go over here and start relationship
between two tables or what I find like
cooler if I go and let me close this.
For example, here customer ID, drag and
drop it on top of the other column, the
customer ID on the fact then release.
With that you're going to create a
relationship. So now what do we have in
this window? You're going to read it
from top to bottom. It's very simple. It
says okay from table dimension customer.
And then you have a nice preview of the
data to understand uh the values inside
the columns to the table fact sales.
Same thing we have a preview. So now
what we are doing over here is we are
just connecting the tables using the
keys. So you can see here it's
highlighted customer ID and customer ID.
This is of course correct because I
dragged and dropped on the correct
columns. But if it was wrong, you can go
and select another column by just like
clicking on the column name. So this I'm
saying the key is the customer number
from the dimension and the customer ID
from the fact. But of course this is not
correct. So I'm going to go and switch
it back. So this is the first thing that
we define. Another thing we define the
cardality and here we have four options.
Now PowerBI going to target one to many
relationship and this is because PowerBI
knows the data and it selects the
correct one. So this selection is based
on the data. But PowerBI has no idea
whether this is correct for the business
or not. Only you and the business users
know the relationship between business
objects in the model. So this is not a
suggestion about how to connect tables.
This is something based on the data that
we have inside PowerBI and PowerBI here
says okay based on all the values that
we see inside the customers this is
unique that's why it is one. But the
customer ID inside the fact you can see
here we have one one it is not unique
that's why we have the money. Now of
course you can go and force another
cardality if you want but PowerBI will
not allow it can say no no we have here
many so you cannot do that. So we're
going to go to the one to many. Now of
course if we start from the table fact
and then dimension is going to be many
to one. It's the same thing of course.
So this is about the cardity. Now the
last one the filter direction. We can
see here we have two options both and
single. So if you leave it as both and
then let's go and check. So let me save
it. So now look at this. We have like an
icon on the relationship. It says both
direction. And here comes something
really important to understand. The best
practices in the star schema is like
this. The filter should move from the
dimension to the fact and not both
directions because this going to create
something called ambiguity in filtering.
That means it going to has like a
different effect on another table. We're
going to have an example. Don't worry
about it for now. Keep it in mind the
filter direction is always from
dimensions to the center to the facts.
So now in order to make this more
healthy and to follow the best practices
we're going to go to the relationship
over here. So either double click on it
or actually we can find it on the right
side. In the properties we see now
informations about the relationship.
Same thing but is like more compacted.
Now the cross filter going to be single
and then apply changes. Now this looks
perfect. The filter direction is from
the dimension to the fact. And I can
tell you if your model looks like this
then you are following the best
practices. On the dimension side we have
the cardality one. On the fact side we
have the star. So it is one to many. And
the direction is from dimension to
facts. Once I see this then I'm going to
be happy in the model. So this is how
you create a relationship between those
two tables. And of course you can see
the relationship on the right side over
here under the group relationships. We
have the new one or you go to manage
relationships over here. and you're
going to have like a nice overview of
all relations in your data model. All
right. Now, before we continue, another
thing that I usually do once I import a
new data, I check whether the ids has
this icon. Like for example, here the
order ID has like an aggregation sign.
Same thing for the product ID, the store
ID. Now this icons means PowerBI can go
and summarize aggregate this column. And
usually we aggregate numbers, right? But
there is only one case where it doesn't
make sense and that is for the ids. We
don't go and find the average of ids or
go and summarize all the values or
something like that. Let me just show
you what I mean. If you go to the report
view and let's go to the fact sales then
grab the order ID over here. So what
this tells us the sum of order ID 10k
but this is not useful information. The
only thing that we want to do with the
order ID is to count it. How many orders
do we have? But we don't need the sum or
the average. And this auto aggregation
is really annoying thing because
sometimes I would like to see the row
data in the front end and always Barbie
I go and aggregate it. That's why what I
do I go to those ids on the facts or in
the dimensions. I click on it and then
go over here and say don't summarize. So
don't do that. And with that PowerBI
will not do that anymore. So let's go
and try. I'm going to go and drag the
order ID in the middle. Look at this.
Now I see the IDs and this is perfect.
So usually I go and do this for all ids
in the facts so that I don't have this
issue. It is again luxury thing that we
do but it is important because usually
as we are building the data model we
have always to go to the report view and
verify whether everything is correct.
All right. So now what we're going to do
next is that as we do data modeling we
would like always to understand the
behavior on the reports. So we test
things in order to understand whether
this is exactly what we expect. And I
usually do it like this. After doing few
things in the model, I go back to the
report view and start testing. Like for
example, I'm going to go and add one
visual only for the facts and another
one only for the customers. So here for
example, I go usually with the table and
I'm going to go and add an order ID,
maybe a customer ID, line total. So only
few columns and then I add a card for
the fact table. So the total sales and
after that for each table I make like an
aggregation in order to see how things
change like the total sales. So same
thing I'm going to go and duplicate it
but this time it's going to be only from
the customer dimension. So the customer
ID first name last name. So that's it.
And as well a card this time it's going
to be the total number of customers. As
you can see it's like I'm building the
model again but on the front end. Now
let's go and test the filtering. Right.
So now if you just click one of those
values you're going to see the table
customer is filtering actually the fact
table. Now it's all about the customer
ID one. Same thing if I click on Anna,
I'm filtering the whole fact table. So
that means anything that I'm filtering
on the right side, it has a direct
effect on the facts. Now let's deselect
and do the opposite. We start selecting
things from the facts and see whether it
has an effect on the customers. Like for
example, the first order. If I click on
it, look at this. Nothing happened to
the right side. I still have five
customers. So it doesn't matter what I'm
like filtering from the fact it has no
effect on the right side. So that's
because it is in one direction. Now
let's go and test the both. If I go over
here and select the relationship say
both apply. Now let's test the report.
It is already filtering the customers.
So now since I'm filtering on the order
ID 8 has the customer three. This has an
effect on the total number of customers
and the visual. And same thing if I go
and start like clicking around it has a
full the filter is moving from the fact
back to the dimension. And of course
this is not a good thing. Now of course
you might say why it's not good. It is
correct. Like here we are just selecting
or filtering one order. It is good
information that we have only one
customer for this one order. Well this
is okay if you have one fact one
dimension. But once you start getting a
lot of dimensions they going to start
filtering each others and it's going to
be full cows. Of course to understand
this effect we have to go and add
another dimension. And this is exactly
what we're going to do now. We're going
to go and extend the data model with a
new dimension. So let's go and get my
friends the dimension products. So let's
go and load it. Then say load. Now we
got a new dimension. It is here the
dimension product. So I will just make
the fact in the middle surrounded with
the dimensions. But now why PowerBI
didn't create a relationship between
those two tables. Now let's go and
create the relationship by drag and drop
the product ID on the product ID. And
now we can see here we have an issue.
This relationship has cardinality many
to many. So here PowerBI is saying there
is something issue with the product ID.
Now by looking to the examples you can
see one two three like we cannot see any
issue here. At the end it is just a
preview like only few rows. But our goal
is of course to connect it with the
product ID. Now let's go and try to
force it to be one to many like we have
done for the customer. So one from the
product and many to the facts. It says
no. It even doesn't allow us to save it.
It says the product ID in the dimension
product contain duplicates the value
six. So this is not really unique my
friends. So what we're going to do we're
going to switch it back to menu to many
in order for PowerBI to allow us to save
it. And then we have to dig into this
issue. Now let's go and save this. Look
at this. Between the products and the
facts we have many to many. And again
this is not healthy. We would like it to
be like the customers one to many. So
now let's go and check the issue with
the products. And we can do that by
going to the table view. So here we have
the customers. Let's go to the products.
It says the product ID6. And yes, we
have duplicates. The same row exists
twice. And this makes of course no
sense. And that's why PowerBI was not
happy about this because it breaks the
rule. So my friends PowerBI was good
enough to detect the issues and it
doesn't go and connect things randomly.
If it sees something wrong, it will not
go and create a relationship. Now, how
we going to fix this? It is very simple.
We're going to go to the Power Query and
clean the data before moduling it. So,
we're going to go to transform data.
Then go inside and make sure to check
the dimension products. And what we have
to do is to just remove duplicates over
here on the repon. Remove duplicates.
And now look at this. The product ID 6
is only once inside our data. And all
the values are now unique. Actually,
that's it. It should fix the issue. So,
let's go and save it. Now let's go and
try to change the cardality again. So
let's try the one to many. And yes, we
are not getting now any more issues.
PowerBI is happy. The product ID is
clean, unique, pointing of course to
many in the fact. Let's go and save it.
So now things looks way better. The
dimension has one, the fact has many.
Same things for the customers. Now of
course the filter direction, both of
them are not that good. Just going to go
and switch it to single. Same thing for
the customer. Now look at this. This is
a perfect data model. It's very
satisfying. All the filters are pointing
from the dimensions to the middle and we
start seeing the stars around the facts
and everything else with a one
cardality. So we have to keep pushing to
get exactly this picture. And of course
the next step is just the luxury things.
You might go and add some maybe metadata
by defining the key. So here it is the
product ID in order to have this small
icon. And now since we have multiple
dimensions, I can show you exactly why
it is bad to have both directions as a
filter between the dimensions and facts.
So again, I'm going to go and switch
them quickly. So here both as well. And
as usual, in order to understand it,
we're going to go to the report level.
And now since we have a third table, I'm
going to go and just add it quickly. So
let me just make those things small in
order to test and fit the products. So
this is our fact, this is the customer
and we can go and add now the products
over here. So I'm going to go and get
rid of those columns and only pick
things from the products. So the product
ID, name, and I'm going to say that's
it. And the last thing I'm going to go
and add card for it. So this time we're
going to go and count the total number
of products. So now those are the
totals. Six products, five customers,
and around 6K of sales. All right. So
now let's start filtering. And we're
going to do that by filtering the
products. Like for example, I would like
to see the total sales for the product
number one. So I can see here we have
2K. But look at this. The customers get
filtered as well. Now I can see only two
customers. And here of course comes the
big question. Should we as well filter
the customers based on the products?
Well, I can tell you most of the cases
we don't need this effect. It is too
extreme to filter as well another
dimension like the customers because
usually this is how the users works on
dashboard. They have the dimensions in
order to filter the major event, the
major measure that we have in the report
which is the total sales. And now if the
filter is filtering another filter, they
going to lose immediately the big
picture. They're going to lose
immediately the other possibilities that
we have in the dashboards. So they're
going to look to the right side and say,
"Oh, we have only two customers." But
they will not think about yeah I'm
seeing two customers because I'm
filtering using the products. This is
too deep and too much. Same thing if
they go to another products they're
going to see wa we have only one
customer in our business. So they will
not as well think inside your data model
and they know ah everything is connected
and so on. They usually use the
dimensions to filter one thing and
imagine you have a lot of dimensions
this going to be catastrophic. filtering
only one small thing going to filter
deeply the whole dashboard and of course
you're going to get the same effect if
you go to the customers over here we go
and use for example Anna they're going
to see okay this is the total sales of
Anna but it is filtering as well the
products now what is way better than
this what we're going to do we're going
to go back to the model and yeah we're
going to go and change things back to
single same thing over here now let's go
back to our reports so now let's try
again we're going to go and select the
product one And now yes I see the total
sales for this product but look at this
the customers going to stay as it is. So
the effect it is not that overwhelming
for the users. Now if they go to the
customers and they say okay let's go and
filter Anna only the fact table going to
change. We still see the six products on
the left side. So the effect is not that
big. So my friends as a default if
you're using star schema don't go and
use the both directions for everything.
This going to be very overwhelming and
very deep for users. Usually all what
they do they want to do analyzes on one
main measure like for example the total
sales and they need your dimensions for
filtering. But if the dimensions starts
filtering each others they going to lose
quickly the big picture of the dashboard
and it's going to make filtering one
thing like an overreaction in the report
by wiping out all other data. That's why
as a default use one single direction
but in extreme cases or if the users
really want to see this effect in some
reports then go and use both directions
but limit it between maybe two tables
only. So this is the best practices for
filter directions in PowerBI. And now
you know why.
>> Thank you. I got it. Now I know. [music]
>> Okay. So now let's go and add another
dimension to our data model. This time
we're going to go and pick the store.
So, dimension store. All right. It is
very cute, very small data model. Let's
go and load it. All right. So, we got it
over here. Let's go and grab it near to
the fact and bring the customers above
something like this. First of all, we
have something good. So, the
relationship between the store and the
fact is one to many. And the filter is
pointing to the right direction. So, if
I go over here, I'm going to say okay,
it is using the store ID as well in the
dimension. So everything looks nice but
now we have this weird thing. We have
like a relationship between the
dimension store and the dimension
customer and it is using this dotted
relationship. It's not the straight line
that we used to see between the fact and
the dimension. So what is going on here?
Let's go and open it. Aha. PowerBI is
able to build a relationship between the
store and the customers using the city.
Well, this is very usual thing that you
have the same information in multiple
dimensions and probably I thought yeah
why not to go and connect them using the
city. This looks nice but it is not a
normal relationship right it was dotted
and you can see over here it says make
this relationship active and it is
deactivated that means we have in
powerbi two type of relationships active
relationship and inactive relationship
so here it is inactive let's go and
activate it and see what can happen say
no there are ambiguous path between fact
sales dimension store fact sales
dimension customers dimension store and
fact sales dimension store I know a lot
things here but simply PowerBI is just
whining about saying we have a loop
relationship so the path is like cycling
between the tables and I cannot go and
activate it otherwise it's going to be
for me unclear how I'm going to answer
your questions and you can see it over
here the loop the cycle so customers and
fact then we have fact and I mission
store and then back so we have a
relationship between the customers and
the fact another one between the store
and the fact and a third one which is
closing the cycle between the store and
the customer and this is exactly the
cycle. Now of course the big question is
why PowerBI doesn't allow that. So what
is the big issue? All right let's have
this very simple example. We have
exactly the same setup here. We have the
customers the stores and they are both
connected to the sales but at the same
time they are connected to each others
using the city. Now let's say that I
would like to see the total sales for
one of our customers. So if I go and
filter for example Maria, I expect that
the filter going to go to the fact sales
like this and the total of sales going
to be 1,500. So this is our
expectations. But the thing is PowerBI
has another path to the sales. So it can
go to the store and then from the store
it can go to the sales. Now because of
this path, PowerBI going to filter the
sales differently and get 2K for this
customer. Now, of course, this is going
to be a big issue for PowerBI because it
has two different results for the same
action and PowerBI cannot decide for us
which one is the correct one and this is
exactly what we mean with ambiguous.
PowerBI don't know the correct path
between two tables. That's why it
prevent us from having this scenario and
PowerBI force us to decide only on one
direction, one path between two tables.
Now, of course, we have the same
scenario if you look to the stores. If
you say, you know what, let's go and
filter by the downtown. It's going to go
to the sales over here and get 2K. But
as well, it has another path through the
customers. So, it can go to the
customers and from customers go to the
sales. Same scenario, same issue. So,
this is ambiguous and PowerBI will not
allow that. Instead, PowerBI says, okay,
I'm going to leave for you the
relationship between those two tables,
but it is inactive. I will not go and
use it. I'm going to go and use only the
active relationships. So if you go for
example and filter Maria PowerBI has one
clear active path between those two
tables and it going to get only one
results. Same thing if you go to the
downtown over here it has as well one
clear path. This is the loop and why
PowerBI was not allowing us to have
ambiguous path different options for the
same action. Okay. So with this now we
have understanded why PowerBI did make
this inactive between the customers and
store and now let's say that okay you
decided that this is the correct path
between those two tables and you want to
activate it. Now what you can do you can
go for example yeah it's wrong but you
can go between the customers and sales
open the relationship and make it
inactive. So now it is dotted and then
go back to the link between customers
and stores and make it active which is
of course again not correct but this is
the way on how to switch between active
and inactive relationships. Now of
course I'm going to get it back because
this is not correct. So now what we're
going to do with this inactive
relationship you have here my friend two
options. Either you're going to say you
know what I would never use this
relationship between those two tables.
It is totally wrong. So that means you
go and just delete this relationship.
But the other option is that we still
actually my friends could use this
relationship inside our reports. Now the
big question is how you going to use the
inactive and at the same time active
relationship in your projects. Now the
thing is the active relationship going
to be always used automatically from
PowerBI. So if you are using any
calculations and filtering in the
charts, PowerBI always going to use the
active relationship. But if you have
special cases where you say, you know
what, I need this inactive relationship.
You can go and use ducks. There is a du
function called use relationship. It's
going to turns on an inactive
relationship specifically for one
calculation. So that the measure the
calculation going to go through an
inactive relationship instead of the
active one. So that means in one report
you can let PowerBI use all time the
active relationship. But for specific
cases, you're going to create an extra
calculation, an extra measure that use
the inactive relationship. So that's why
my friends, if you have an inactive
relationship between two tables, either
drop it or you're going to use DAX in
order to use this path for specific
calculations. So those are our two
options. But now I'm going to say for
this scenario I don't need it. So I'm
going to go and delete it. So yes, now
again everything looks nice. All the
dimensions are pointing toward the
facts. The cardalities around the fact
are the many, the star and the cardality
on the dimensions are one. So far
everything is healthy like plants.
All right, let's [music] keep going and
connect more things to our data model.
Now this time we're going to go and
connect another customer dimension, the
loyalty. So let's go and do that. Again,
a very simple dimension. All right. Now
you can see that PowerBI did connect our
new dimension to another dimension to
the customers using a onetoone
relationship. So let's go and open it.
It says okay we are connecting using the
customer ID which is correct. And it
says as well the customer ID in the new
dimension is unique. So we don't have
here duplicates. Of course same thing in
our original customer dimension.
Everything is unique here. And that's
why PowerBI did decide to go with the
one to one relationship. So now the
question is should we panic? Should we
leave it like this? This onetoone
relationships are actually a harmless
relationship and you will not do a lot
of mistakes. If you leave it as it is,
it will not go and lead to wrong numbers
or any issues in the front end. The only
side effect that you have to think of is
that PowerBI has to go and join those
two tables in order to present the
results. So it is an extra effort for
PowerBI to travel from one table to
another. but it has no effect on the
correctness on the report. And here you
have actually two options on how to do
it. Either you're going to leave it as
it is and here you could say you know
what it makes no sense to have them like
splitted. I can go and join those two
tables together and merge them into one
dimension. So with that I reduce the
number of travels for PowerBI and maybe
speed up things a little bit. So very
famous solution is to just go and merge
them. Don't leave them separated. So for
example here the names and the tier
going to go together inside the
dimension customers. So I'm going to say
this is the default solution that I
usually do in my projects. But now in
projects sometimes we decide to split
things using the onetoone relationships
for some reasons like for example your
dimension customer over the time gets
bigger and bigger. you have a lot of
columns about the customers and in order
for you to manage things easily you say
you know what I'm going to put all the
descriptions about the customers in one
table and then group another set of
columns in another table maybe some date
informations about the last login the
first sign up so they are like group of
columns about the same topic and then
connect those two tables using onetoone
relationship or it could be for security
reasons where you split some sensitive
data into another table so that you
could hide this type of informations and
you show only the informations that are
allowed. So that's we have like split
between insensitive and sensitive
informations and we connect them using
the one to one relationships. But again
those are special edge cases where we
have to go and split things. But as a
default if you see one to one
relationship you can go and merge them
into one dimension. And this is exactly
what we're going to do now. We're going
to go and merge those two tables
together. And how we going to do it?
We're going to use the power query. So
we're going to go to transform data and
I'm going to go and make this bigger. So
let's go to the dimension customer and
then we're going to go and say merge
queries. This is the first table. We
need the second table the loyalty. Now
we have both of them. Of course we have
to connect them using the customer ID.
And here be careful. You have to decide
about the join. I usually always use
lift join. Inner join is dangerous
because it's going to go and filter the
data. And by looking to this I can say
the customer has more weight than the
customer loyalty because it has the main
informations about the customers and I
would not like to lose anything. So you
start with the main table and then the
secondary table and make sure to use the
lift join. So actually that's it. Let's
go and hit okay. Now we have it here as
a table. The next step we're going to go
and expand it. So we have to select the
columns that we need. Well, we need the
tiers. We need the points, but we don't
need the customer ID because we have it
already as primary key. So, actually,
that's it. Let's hit okay. Now, look at
this. We have the tiers and as well the
points. The next step, I'm going to go
and just rename them to be more
friendly. So, we're going to go over
here and say rename. This going to be
tier and the other one going to be
points. So, this looks really nice. Now,
in our model, we don't need anymore this
dimension because it is already merged
into the customers. So what we can do we
can right click on it and deactivate
enable load. Yes. Continue. So with that
we deactivate this table to be loaded
inside our model. And with that we have
everything inside the dimension
customers. So this is how we merge. It
is like preparation step before the data
modeling. So I'm going to go and close
it. Make sure to save it as well. Now
look at this. The dimension did
disappear but we have its informations
inside the customers. Again, it is not
that dramatic if you just leave it, but
it is more clean to bring everything
into one dimension to have the shape of
the star schema and you don't have to
deal with a lot of tables as you are
building your reports. So, the dimension
customer did absorb another dimension
that has the relationship one to one.
Now, my [music] friends, dimensions
don't always live in dimension tables.
Sometimes they sneak into fact tables as
descriptive informations. Our job is to
spot those sneaky dimensions inside the
facts and pull them out into real
dimensions. So let's go and find them.
>> Well, let's see.
>> So now what we're going to do, we're
going to go and inspect our fact sales
to see whether we have dimensions inside
this table. Let's go to the table view
in order to inspect. Now, as we learned
at the start, fact tables going to
contain a lot of ids, dates, and
numbers. So let's see whether this is
the case. Yes, we have a lot of ids at
the starts. We have the dates. We have
the numbers but as well we have a lot of
text over here. This is a big alarm. Now
usually text and string columns they
used in order to describe something and
this is exactly the job of the
dimensions not the fact. So that means
my friends all those columns are
actually good candidates for dimensions
and it makes no sense to leave them
inside our facts. And this happens a lot
in real projects where you think okay
this table has an event it is
transactions we have dates and stuff but
still it has as well same time a lot of
description so that's why it's time to
extract all those dimensions from the
facts and make our fact clean and as
well we got to get some useful
dimensions so of course the question is
what we going to do with all those
informations do we have here one
dimension two three well this depends on
the relationship between those columns
so now let's see What do we have over
here? We have promotion code. So it is a
code that is used maybe for some sales.
We have the order channel in store,
online, phone, the order status. We have
information about the payment methods,
credit card, PayPal and so on. The card
network and the card type. Now your main
job is to spot the columns that relate
to each others. And from looking at this
I can say the payment methods, the card
network and the card type. All those
three columns are actually related to
each others and they are perfect in
order to make a dimension and this
dimension of course going to be the
payment dimension the order status and
the order channel promotion code they
are not related to the payment methods.
So that's why I would not go and connect
those stuff to our new dimension. Now of
course the big question is how we going
to split? Well again that means we need
to transform the data and for that we
have the power query. So let's go there.
We don't use power query only to merge
things as well to split things. So now
there are like multiple ways on how to
do it. I usually do it like this. Now
the thing is we don't have the dimension
yet inside our data model. So either
you're going to go and get it from the
CSV file or you can go and duplicate the
fact sales which I think it is way
easier than just like loading the data
again. So I'm going to go and duplicate
the fact sales and then I'm going to
give it the name dimension. It's going
to be the payments. So this is duplicate
from our fact sales and of course I
don't need all those columns right for
the payments I just need the last three.
So what we do we're going to go and
select everything and say go and remove
the columns with that I got only the
three columns that I need for the
payments. Now comes something really
important to do those informations
usually going to have a lot of
duplicates. So look at the first two
rows they are just the same. So what
we're going to do we're going to go over
here and say remove the duplicates. So
with that each row is unique and this is
very important for the dimensions. In
order to get one to many relationship
with the facts. Now look at this what we
are missing. We need the ID for the
dimension in order to connect it with
the facts. We don't connect things using
text. And in order to generate an ID
it's going to be very simple. We're
going to go and add a column. And then
we add an index column. It's going to be
a sequence of number for each row. So
we're going to go over here and say okay
start from one. And with that we have a
nice ID. I'll just going to go bring it
to the start. And then what we're going
to do, we're going to go and rename it
like all others. So we're going to say
payment ID. Now look at this. If you go
and compare it to any other dimensions
that we have, this is exactly a nice
dimension that we could use in our model
to do filtering and all other stuff.
Again, very important that we have an ID
and the data is unique. We don't need
many to many relationships. So this is
how you build a dimension out of facts.
But we are not done yet. We have to
connect now the dimension to our facts.
So if you go to the fact sales and you
can see that in the fact we are always
connecting the dimensions using ids and
we need the same thing actually for the
payments. So actually we don't need all
those informations in the fact we just
need the payment ID. Now how we going to
do it? This is going to sounds a little
bit weird but we have to merge now the
fact sales with the dimension payments
just in order to get the payment ID. I
know this sounds strange that you are
splitting and then combining but only
with this you're going to get a clean
model later in the next layers so that
it is easy to connect and as well easy
to use later in the reports. So now what
you going to do we have to go and merge
things. So the first is going to be the
fact sales. The second is going to be
the new dimension the payments. Of
course the question is how you going to
go and connect those two tables. We're
going to use the three columns. So we
need the payment methods the card
network and the card type. Same thing
from the first table from the fact we're
going to use those three columns. So we
have to connect all those columns in
order to get the payment ID. And of
course it's going to work because they
are actually the same columns. Again
we're going to use only the left outer
join. This looks good. Let's go and hit
okay. Now we got the whole dimension in
the facts. We don't need that. We just
need only one thing, the payment ID. So
let's go and select it and say okay.
Look at this. We have it already here.
Let's go and rename it. So this going to
be payment ID. And what we're going to
do, we're going to go and put it side by
side by all other columns, right? It
deserve now its place. So I'm just going
to go and put it at the end. Now look at
this. It looks clean. We have customer
ID, product ID, store ID, and the
payment ID. The last step that we have
to do is to clean up. So we don't need
anymore those three columns. I'm going
to go and delete them. So right click
and remove. So it's going to be over
here. Now look at this. Our fact is
clean. And with that I'm going to say we
successfully extracted a dimension out
of facts. We have of course other
informations but we have now less
descriptions in the fact. Now the last
step. We have of course still some text
but we're going to do that as a second
step. Now let's go and save and close.
Then apply all the changes. All right.
So with this we got a new dimension our
dim payments and as well PowerBI did
connect it correctly. So things looks
really nice. We have one to many
relationship and as well the direction
is correct. You can see we are getting
the shape of the star right. If I just
move things like this fact in the middle
and surrounded by dimensions and
everything is pointing to [music] our
facts.
So now of course we are not done yet. We
still have some descriptive informations
inside our facts. So the promotion code,
the order channel and the order status.
Now the big question is how we going to
extract those informations. Do they
relate to each others? Now if you look
closely, you would not have the feeling
those informations actually relate to
each other. So the promotion code has
nothing to do with the order channel.
Same thing for the order status. So they
are actually three different piece of
informations in the fact and all three
together will not form a dimension and
they are not related enough to go and
bring them together into one dimension.
So now how are we going to solve this?
You're going to find in some projects
that people say you know what for each
column we're going to go and create a
dimension. So they start splitting each
of those columns inside the fact and
build a dimension and create for it an
ID. And over the time you're going to
find in their star schema a lot of many
dimensions around the facts. One
dimension, one column and so on. And I
think this is really overreacting. So
this going to be a lot of work if you
have a lot of columns inside the facts.
And this is usually the thing in
projects. Fact tables are usually big
tables and they have a lot of status
columns. So how we going to solve this?
We don't want it inside the fact, right?
Well, the solution for this something
called a junk dimension. A junk
dimension. It is a small dimension that
bundles several unrelated low-level
flags. So all those junk or garbage,
let's say columns that are actually not
related to each others and take space
inside the facts, we're going to go and
bundle them into a junk table, a junk
dimension. And each time you find a new
flag that is unrelated for anything,
you're going to go and put it in this
junk dimension. So this is the best
practices in dimensional modeling or
building a star schema to put all
unrelated informations into one
dimension. So now let's go and see how
we're going to do it. So that means my
friends all those three columns going to
go into a new dimension. So how we going
to do it? So same thing as we done with
the payments. We're going to go to the
power query. We're going to repeat the
same steps. So we're going to go and
duplicate the fact table and we're going
to give it a name. So here the official
name people going to go and call it like
dimension junk or I usually go and use a
friendly name. So dimension flags well
it doesn't matter which one you're going
to use. It is just the idea. So what
we're going to do same thing we don't
need all those informations. We just
need the unrelated columns. So remove
the columns. And now comes something
really important to do with that. So we
have here a lot of nulls inside the junk
dimension and we have to handle it
otherwise the join or the merge with the
fact sales will not work. So this is
very critical. What we're going to do
we're going to go and right click on it
and say replace values. So instead of
nulls we're going to say unknown or you
can say okay. So any string value that
you want like unknown or not available.
Let's go and hit okay. So this looks way
better. Now only then we're going to go
and remove the duplicate. So, make sure
to select everything and then go over
here, remove duplicates. Nice. Now,
things are unique. The last step, we're
going to go and add a column. So, we're
going to add an index that starts from
one and then move it to the starts.
We're going to call you the flag ID. So,
this is our junk dimension. Everything
is ready. We have a lot of unnecessary
informations to gather, but it is not
that big. Now, what we're going to do,
we're going to go to the fact sales and
connect the junk to the facts. But we
have to be very careful since we're
going to use all those three columns in
the joins. They must match. And now the
promotion code will not work, right?
Because here we have nulls and in the
junk we have the unknown. That's why we
have to handle this as well. So we're
going to go and say okay, replace
values. If you are null, then you are
unknown. Let's hit okay. Nice. Now we're
going to go and connect things using the
merge. So we're going to go to the right
side and select those three columns and
connect it to our junk dimension. Same
thing we just need the flag ID in the
dimension, right? So left join and let's
hit okay. So with this we got the
dimension as a table but all what we
need is the flag ID. So I'm going to go
and deselect everything and say flag ID.
And look at this. It is working. So
before I move it, I'm going to go and
call it flag ID. And this junk as well
deserve its place near the other
dimensions. So I'm going to go and move
it to the left side. But I'm going to go
and put it at the end. So look at this.
We have the flag ID, the junk, and on
the right side, now we're going to go
and remove all those stuff. So, right
click on it, remove the columns. Now,
look to our facts. We have over here a
lot of ids. Then, we have the dates and
we have numbers and all the junk now
inside a junk dimension. So, this looks
really clean. Now, let's go and close
and save. Everything is loaded
correctly. Let's go to the model. Now,
we have our junk dimension. I'm going to
put it here on top. and you go down and
we have to make sure this is one to many
relationship and the correct direction.
So my friends, I'm really happy with the
result so far. With this we have
extracted a new two dimensions out of
the fact. So we have a really solid
dimension called the payment. All the
columns relate to each others. But as
well we have a lot of junk dimensions, a
lot of unrelated flags. We bundled
everything together into one dimension
and connected back to the fact sales. So
this is really amazing. I always keep my
eyes on the directions of the filters,
the cardalities just to make sure that
we have a clean star schema in order to
do analytics.
All right friends, [music] so now we're
going to speak about dimensions that
they are kind of special. So they play
different roles in different scenarios.
That's why we call them the roleplaying
dimensions.
>> What um what do you think of role play?
>> So now let's understand what this means.
Okay. Okay. So now in order to
understand it, we're going to have this
very simple scenario where we have two
dimensions. The salespersons and as well
the managers. Both of them are connected
to the fact sales. And now with this
setup, I can go and find out the total
sales for example per person. If I go to
the Anna here, I can see that she made
two orders and the total sales is around
1,500. Same thing if I go to other
salesperson like Carlos Dana with that
I'm able to find out the total sales and
the total number of orders. But now if I
go to the other dimension to the
managers and I go and select the team of
pop, I'm going to see the total number
of orders and as well the total number
of sales for the whole team and his team
has only two persons. So the one and the
two, so Anna and Carlos and same thing
if I go and check the other manager, I'm
going to see as well the total sales for
that team. So far nothing is crazy,
right? It is working. But now what could
happen in real business that one of the
managers like for example pop he can go
and sometime close some sales. So that
means if I look to pop as a salesperson
I can go over here and see okay he
closed two sales and I can see the total
amount of sales. And if I look at pop as
a manager I'm going to see now the total
number of sales and orders for the whole
team. So that means I can look at pop in
two directions. One as a salesperson and
another as a manager. So so far there is
no big problem. But the issue is that
the design of the data model. We have
the same person in two dimensions. So
that means we have double informations
and this is not really good because for
example now if maybe pop now change his
name or address or whatever we have
information inside the dimension. I have
to go now and update both of the
dimensions. Of course here it's a very
simple example but over the time this
can be really hard to maintain and to
manage and as well this is a bad design
if I make like a dimension for each
role. Maybe next day I'm going to get
like a new role like an account owner.
Then we're going to have like a third
dimension about the persons and then
we're going to have maybe pop in all
three dimensions. So that means you're
going to lose control quickly if you
start splitting the dimensions by the
role. Especially if they are identical.
You can see here we have the same
columns. We have ID, name, team, ID,
name, team. So they have the same
schema. The only difference is the role.
So now of course what is the solution?
It is very obvious. We're going to go
and bring all those dimensions that are
identical and we're going to bring them
into one dimension that going to play
different roles. Okay. So now how it
going to looks like in the modeling
we're going to go and combine those two
dimensions into one generic dimension
called employee. So before it was
splitted by the role but now we have it
generic. And of course in the future if
we had like an HR dimension we can go
and always fit it inside the employee so
that we have like single point of truth
for people inside the company. Now of
course each person going to be one row
inside the dimension. And now if we do
this of course we have to be careful not
to lose information from the module.
Like for example before we had a manager
we had a salespersons. Those
informations were the table name and
they are of course important in the
model. But now instead of having them in
the names, we're going to go and put
them as a values inside a new column
called a ro. So that we have one
complete dimension that is ready to be
reused multiple times inside the facts.
Now by looking to this you can see that
our dimension going to play two roles
right salesperson and manager. And for
that we have to go and create two
relationships. One for the salesperson
and one for the manager. And of course
in PowerBI we cannot have both of them
active. one of them going to be active
and the rest going to be inactive. So
for now, for example, the saleserson
going to be the active relationship and
the manager going to be the inactive. So
now let's have an example like before
let's see the total sales for Anna. We
can see we're still going to get the
total sales the two orders. Same thing
if I go to Carlos to Diana and as well
to our manager Bob. So by looking at
this our dimension now is playing the
role of the salesperson. But now let's
say that I would like now to switch the
roles and I would like to see the total
sales for the whole team for the
managers. So that means we have to
switch roles for this dimension and we
can do that by using the other
relationship the manager one. Of course
we can do that using ducks. And now the
dimension employee is playing this role.
So if I go to pop I will not see the
sales of pop. I'm going to see the sales
of the whole team. Same thing if I go to
the other manager I'm going to see as
well the sales of the whole team. Now if
I go to Anna, Carlos, Diana, I will not
see anything because they are not
managers. They don't have teams. So as
you can see, I'm using the same table
but from two different perspectives. One
as a salesperson and another one as a
manager. Now imagine you have a third
role. All what you have to do is to go
and create a new relationship between
those two tables and you use that
relationship in order to play another
role for this dimension. So that's why
my friends we call the dimension
employee is roleplaying dimension. It is
just a dimension that is playing
different roles for the same fact table
by using multiple relationship to it and
only using one active relationship at a
time and of course we switch roles by
using ducks function called the user
relationship. So this is what we mean
with the role playinging dimension. Now
let's go to PowerBI and see how we're
going to do that. Okay. Okay. So, as
usual, we're going to go and connect our
dimensions. This time, we're going to go
and get to the managers and as well the
salespersons. So, this one over here.
Load. Now, at the start, if you are not
investigating about those new
dimensions, you're going to see, okay,
we have here a manager ID. So, I'm going
to go and connect it with the fact.
Looks good. One to many. So, I'm not
hurting the star schema. Same thing for
the salespersons. I have an ID for it in
the fact. So I'm going to go and connect
it as well. One to many. So at the start
things looks healthy, right? But now if
you go and investigate the data itself,
we're going to see that the dimension
manager has like an ID, name, email,
team. And it going to look identical to
the salesperson. We have as well ID,
name, email, team, and so on. So this
going to be like an indicator for you to
say, you know what, let's go and make
from this roleplaying dimension. So of
course now the question is how we going
to merge those two into one dimension.
As usual we have to do transformations
using power query. So let's go to
transform data. Okay. So now we are
inside and we see here the manager and
the person. Of course in order to make a
union between those two tables we have
to stack them and for that we have the
append queries. We are not merging. So
we are just like stacking the tables on
top of each others. But now if we do
this immediately we're going to lose a
very important information to understand
where the data come from. So for example
here is Anna is a saleserson or a
manager. That's why before we append we
have to go and add a column. That's
going to help us to understand the
source of each row. So in order to add a
new column we're going to go over here
and say add column. We're going to go
and say custom column. So we're going to
give it a name. It's going to be the
role. And now we have to define what is
the value for each row. This is going to
be a static value. So we will not go and
select any other available columns. It's
going to be always a same static value
the saleserson. So actually that's it.
This is the column name and this is the
static value. Let's go and say okay. And
now with this we can see for each row we
have the same value saleserson. Now we
have to go and do the same thing for the
managers so that we don't lose this
important information. Again a custom
column. It's going to be the role and a
static value. So you're going to be the
manager. That's it. Let's go and hit
okay. Look at this. We have for each
person now the role of manager. Okay. So
with this we prepared the two dimensions
now to get appended. I'm going to go to
the saleserson then home and we're going
to go and say append. So we are
appending two tables. Append to the
table manager. All right. Now look at
this. Each person has the role of
manager. So with this we have now the
role for the two tables. But I think
that we're going to do with that before
we append. We have to make sure that all
column names are the same. So here we
have name, email, team, and so on. The
only difference is actually the ID. So
what we're going to do is that we're
going to go and rename it. So instead of
salesperson ID, it's going to be an ID.
And same thing for the managers going to
go and rename it to ID. So as you can
see, I'm trying to bring those two
tables to become really identical. only
after preparation we go and merge the
two dimensions into one. Now we are
ready. So I'm going to go to the
saleserson and from here I'm going to go
and append the second table the manager.
All right we are appending two tables.
The second table going to be the
dimension manager. Let's go and hit
okay. Look at this. The main thing that
we are not getting any nulls which is
perfect. So we have here now 10 persons.
The names the email the team and very
important of course the role. Now the
last step that we're going to do is that
we're going to go and rename this
because this is not anymore the
saleserson. This is a generic one the
role playing dimension. So I'm going to
go and call it dim employee and of
course we don't need the manager. So I'm
going to go and disable it. Don't enable
load so that we don't see it in our
model. Okay. So this is our role playing
dimension. Let's go and save and close
everything. Now look at this. We got
only one dimension for the employee and
not two. And of course now comes the
very important question how to connect
the role playing dimension to our facts.
So again we have two roles that means
two relationships. The first one I think
it is working. So we have between the
saleserson from the fact and the ID and
this is an active one but we need the
second one. So what we're going to do
we're going to grab the ID and now put
it on the manager ID. So yes this is one
to many relationship but of course we
cannot activate it because we have
already one active relationship to our
facts. So look at this. This is exactly
the role playinging dimension. You have
two relationships. One of them is active
and the other is inactive. All right. So
with this we are done with the data
modeling. Now of course comes the big
question. How we going to go and use
those two relationships at the same
time. So let's go to the report view in
order to make an example. At the start
let's go and see the total sales for
each employee. So, we're going to go
grab the name, the role, and of course,
we need the total sales. And that's
means we're going to go to the fact
table and grab the line total [snorts]
and drop it over here. Now, of course,
the question is which relationship did
PowerBI uses in order to connect the
employee and the sales. This is my
friends, the active one. So, that means
it is connecting the ID with the
saleserson and not the manager ID.
Manager ID is inactive. And with this we
got a really nice total sales for each
person. So far nothing crazy right? This
is like the default setup in PowerBI.
But now of course comes the question how
we going to show side by side as well
the total sales for each team not
[clears throat] for each individual
person. So that means I would like to
see the line total but using the
relationship manager ID to the dimension
employee. Now, of course, in order to do
that, we have to go and create an extra
calculation in the fact in order to use
this relationship. So, we're going to go
and write a DAX. So, how to do it? Right
click on the fact and say new measure.
And then we get here a new window. In
order to write the calculation, I'm
going to go and expand it. So, now we're
going to do it step by step. It is not
that hard. So, first of all, I'm going
to call it sales by team. So, this is
the name of the new field. So, now of
course the question is what we are
calculating? we are aggregating the line
of total. So very simple, we're going to
say sum and then we're going to go and
find the table. So it's going to be the
fact sales and we are searching for line
total. So this you're going to get the
total sales. But of course, if you leave
it like this, then you're going to get
the same effect like before. PowerBI
going to go and use the active
relationship between the fact and the
dimension. But no, we don't want that.
We want PowerBI to use the inactive
relationship. And for that we have the
nice function use relationship so that I
force PowerBI to use it the way that I
want. So here we just have to define the
keys between the two tables. So it is
between the fact sales and this time we
need the manager ID and the manager ID
goes to the dimension employee and here
we have only the ID. So it is very
simple. We are just saying okay go and
calculate the total sales but use the
relationship. Then we define the keys.
So the manager ID to the employee ID.
Now let's go and get out. Now look at
this. We have new extra column inside
our fact called sales by team. It has as
well this calculation icon because we
just calculated. It has as well this
calculation item means we are
calculating this column. And now by
going to this you have now the two
options. Either you want the total sales
using the active relationship by just
dragging the line total like we have
done at the start or if you want the
same measure but using another inactive
relationship. We're going to go and grab
our calculation and put it in the
visual. Look at this. I'm able now to
see everything side by side. I can see
over here for example pop. You can see
in one go his total sales as a
salesperson and the total sales as a
manager for his whole team. Now for Anna
of course she has no team. So that's why
we don't see any number. For the other
managers, they are not making any sales.
That's why you're going to see here
nulls. But you're going to see their
total sales for their themes. As you can
see, my friends, in one go, in one
visual, we are able to use multiple
relationships between the two tables,
the fact and the dimension. And this is
exactly the power of the roleplaying
dimension. I don't have here like two,
three, four tables. I have everything in
one table in one go. And in the future
if I got like an access to another role
I'm going to go and integrate it inside
the employee table so that I reduce the
number of dimensions around the fact and
I'm going to be very flexible using the
relationships in order to do the
aggregations. Okay. So now let's do a
quick recap. Role playing dimension. It
is one dimension that plays multiple
roles in the same fact. You're going to
use it when you see you have multiple
entities that have the same structure,
the same schema. And you're going to
have the fact that is pointing using
multiple ids to the same [music] entity.
All right friends. So now finally we're
going to start talking about a concept
that is not that easy. The fact tables.
This one confuses a lot of people and I
think it get people lost in data
modeling once they start working with
facts. But the good news is that there
is like one trick one very simple
concept. If you understand it then
suddenly working with fact tables going
to feel easy. And here I'm talking about
understanding the grain in the facts. So
now of course the big question is what
is a grain? The grain is the level of
details that one row in your fact table
represents. So now of course in order to
understand what this exactly means we're
going to have very simple example. All
right. So in this example we have three
fact tables and at the start if you look
at this inside your data model you're
going to get the feeling they are all
like the same. The total number of sales
is like identical and we are speaking
about the same business. So they are
very similar fact tables. But now my
friends if you zoom in and start looking
to the details you're going to
understand those three fact tables are
completely different from each others.
And that's because of one thing the
grain is different. Each table has
different level of details. Okay, let me
show you what I mean. Let's start with
the first table. So here we have the
fact sales. Now you have to ask this
question. What does one row in this
table represent? So we have to try to
explain it in one sentence. So now you
can see that this one row is actually
part of like one order. So here we can
see that we ordered three products in
the same order number, right? That means
each row is representing one line of one
order. And this is my friend the grain
of this fact table. Each row represent a
line. Same thing here. For example, in
this order, the one row representing one
line of order. So this is the grain for
the first table. Let's go to the second
one. Again, we have to ask the same
question. What does one row represent?
Now, if you go and pick one row and say
loud, each row here is representing the
whole order. It doesn't matter how many
products did we order. It could be one
product, 10 products. It's still going
to be only one row. So my friends the
grain in this fact table going to be the
whole order. It is not anymore like
detailed like the fact sales right. So
it has like less details than the first
facts. Same thing if I go to another row
like for example over here. This one is
representing the order. But if I go to
the other fact you can see it contains
two products. This is the grain of this
table. Now let's go to the last one.
Same thing. Ask the same question. What
does one row represent in this fact? Now
if you go and check each row you can see
we don't have anymore the orders like
each row is representing one month. We
have January, February and March. So
that means each row here is representing
a month of sales right? So the grain for
this fact table going to be the month
and of course here it is highly
aggregated compared to the other facts.
Other facts contains more details. So
that means my friends all those three
facts have different grains and
different level of details. The first
one fact sales is the most detailed one.
One row represent one line of order and
in the second fact we are losing those
details. So the fact order the grain
here is the whole order and the third
fact sales monthly. The level of detail
here is really low. So we have here high
aggregation and the grain here is month
of sales. We don't see any details about
the orders or the line of orders. So
this is what we mean with the grain. It
is not that hard. Right?
>> That's what she said. And from now on,
each time you see a fact table in your
model, you're going to ask this one
simple question and you're going to say
it loud. What does each row represent in
my facts? And once you answer this
question, then everything going to be
simple for you. You're going to
understand your fact. You're going to
understand how to connect it inside your
data model. But what is way more
important, you're going to write correct
DAX calculations on top of your fact. So
my friends, understanding the grain is
the first thing that you're going to do
once you start data moduling. And as
well once you understand it then you
have really solid foundations otherwise
things might go wrong. So now let me
show you an example why exactly it is
critical for calculations. Okay again
here we have one fact table the sales
and it looks simple right and now if I
go and start asking you business
questions for this fact and you jump
immediately to the calculations without
understanding the grain of this fact you
might start doing wrong calculations.
Like for example if I tell you go and
find the total number of orders. Now you
might say okay this is really simple I'm
going to go and count the order ids
inside the fact and you tell me okay we
have six orders in the table my friend
that was really quick look again do we
have really six orders well no right we
have here only three orders so my
friends without like taking step back
and understanding the grain of your fact
table even if it's like simple like this
you're going to do wrong calculations so
what one row represent in this fact it
is a line of order so that means if I
want to find the total the number of
orders in this very detailed fact table.
I have to go and count the order ID but
using distinct counts. So I'm counting
one ID only once and with that you're
going to get three orders. Now of course
in some calculations you're going to be
lucky like for example if you go over
here and I tell you find the total sales
inside our business. You're going to go
and make the sum of this column and
you're going to get it correct. All
right. So now let's move to the third
one. This going to be tricky one. If I
ask you to find the total cost of
shipping, if you don't understand the
grains, you're going to go immediately
to the shipping and say, okay, the sum
of all those values and this is wrong,
my friends. Because look at this, the
same cost is like repeating for each
line, right? And this of course makes
sense because the cost of shipping going
to be for the whole order, right? For
all products. So that means if you go
blindly and start like aggregating all
those values and you tell me, okay, the
total cost of shipping is 450. This is
wrong. You still have to be careful with
the grain and it is way more correct if
you say okay I'm going to go and find
the highest shipping cost in the whole
order in case we got like wrong numbers
or different pricing you're going to go
with the highest one and with that the
total cost of shipping is 200 and here
comes really something important to
understand that in one table we have
different columns with different grains
and the grain of the line of sales is
actually the line of order and not the
whole order and if you go and compare it
to the shipping Here we have different
grain in this column. It is again the
order itself and not the line of order.
So that means not only you have to
understand what each one row is
representing but as well you have to
understand your numbers at which level
they are. It could be as the same level
as the table itself like the line of
sales or it could be a different
aggregated grain like we had in the
shipping and the order ID. So my
friends, as you can see, even with a
very simple fact table, you might do
wrong calculations if you don't
understand the grain of your table and
as well the grain of each column.
Otherwise, you're going to be delivering
wrong numbers to the business and they
might do wrong decisions. [music]
All right friends, so now we come to the
most confusing topic in data modeling.
How to work with multiple facts. Here I
can tell you from my projects I saw a
lot of weird things a lot of mistakes
that happens in data modeling once you
start working with facts. So what
happened that people see like two facts
and they might noticed okay they are
sharing a common column and usually
comes the idea why not to go and build a
relationship between them. I would like
to combine those two. Maybe others going
to say you know what let's go and merge
those two facts together or maybe go and
append those two facts. So you have
different opinions and different designs
and at the end all what you want to do
is I would like to do some analyszis
like colorations in order to compare the
numbers between those two facts. So at
the start this sounds smart but once you
start like combining building
relationships you're going to understand
this going to be the main mistake that
you do in data modeling that going to
generate a lot of issues and wrong
numbers in the reports. And this is
exactly what we're going to do now. I'm
going to show you multiple scenarios,
multiple fact tables, show you the bad
data modeling design and of course I'm
going to show you the solutions, the
best practices. So now let's get
started. All right. So now let's start
with this very simple scenario. We have
two fact tables. Fact sales US and fact
sales EU. Now before we do anything, we
have to understand those two facts and
we start with the very important
question. What is the grain? What each
row is representing? On the left side,
each row is actually representing one
order. So we have 1 2 3 4. If you go to
the right side, it is the same thing.
Each row is representing actually an
order as well. So this is the first
thing that we understood from those two
facts. They have the same grain. It is
the order. So this is the first thing
that we have understood. Now the second
thing is to check what we are talking
about inside each table. What is the
event on the left side? You can see the
event is actually a sales is happening.
So we have an order ID, customer, a
product, and the total amount of sales.
So it is an event about the sales. Now
let's go and check the right side. Well,
it is the same event as well. Sales are
happening here. Order ID, customer,
product and total amount of sales. So
thus means those two fact tables are
actually not only having the same grain
but as well they are identical. They are
talking about the same event. They have
as well the same structure, the same
shape. They are just splitted into two
tables. And this happens a lot in real
world because source systems usually
tend to split things into multiple
tables. So here they split by the
region, by countries, maybe by dates as
well. Very classical one, they split
tables by years, but at the end it is
the same table, but it's splited into
multiple tables in order to make things
more manageable or maybe for security
reasons. So now this is the setup. And
now of course the big question is if I
want to go and build a reports where I
need data from the left and from the
right. So what you're going to do in the
data modeling in order to build this
visual either you're going to go and
build a relationship or you're going to
go and combine those two tables into one
by using merge or append. So you have to
decide on what to do with those two
facts inside the data model. Now let's
start with the first one about the
relationships. It makes no sense to
build a relationship between those two
because they are identical tables and
usually we build a relationship between
two different things like sales and
customers orders and products. So that
means it makes no sense to build a
relationship between those two facts.
What is left is to go and combine them
into one. And here we have the two
options, merge or append. Now if you go
and merge those two, it will not work
because yes, you have a key like the
order ID. But actually there is no match
between them. Here they start with the
1,001 and here they start with the
2,000s. So if you merge those two, you
will not get any result. What is way
better is to go and append those two
together. So you go and stack them on
top of each others. And with this you're
going to get all the orders inside your
business. So with this you got all the
eight orders and things looks healthy
right? But there is like small mistake
that we have in the module or in this
one table. We don't know anymore which
order comes from where. So we lost this
small information in the table name.
From here we can see the orders come
from the US and on the right side we can
see they come from the EU. That's why in
best practices if you go and append two
tables go and create a new column like
for example here the source in order to
know where those sales come from. So
with this after combining the two facts
into one we will not lose any
information. And now of course the last
question is can we use now this fact
table in order to do aggregations? Well
yes if you go and find the total amount
of sales you're going to get a correct
number. You will not get anything
corrupted. So this my friends the best
way to react on this scenario. If you
have two tables having the same grain,
having the same event, the same shape so
they are completely identical, go and
append them together into one single
facts. But of course, don't forget to
add this new column in order to
understand the source of each row. Okay,
so that was an easy scenario. Now let's
go to another one where we have as well
two fact tables. This time we have the
fact sales and on the right side we have
the fact revenue. Same thing before we
do anything we have to understand the
content of those two facts. So what is
the grain on the left side? Each row is
representing one order. On the right
side, same thing. Each row is
representing as well one order. So again
we have two fact tables with the same
grain. Now the second question are they
are dealing with the same events? Well
on the left side like the previous
scenario we are dealing with the sales.
So we have an order ID, customer and the
total sales. But now on the right side
this time we have different event. Yes
we have the order ID but we are talking
about the source of the revenue and as
well the total number of the revenue. So
this is the setup. We have the same
grain. We have different events but we
are talking about the same thing about
the orders. Now of course same question.
What we going to do if we need to build
a reports and we need informations from
those two fact sales. Are we going to go
connect them using a relationship or go
and combine them into one fact using
merge or append. So now let's start with
the relationship. If you go and connect
them you're going to get the cardality
one to one. Well usually if we have one
to one relationship it makes no sense to
keep them splitted. It's way better if
you just combine them into one table.
But of course, always under one
condition if they have the same grain.
So what are the other options? We're
going to go and combine those two facts
tables into one single fact. Here we
have two options either append or merge.
Now I found a lot of projects where they
go and actually append those two facts
together. So they look like almost
similar those two fact tables. You have
an ID, you have maybe something that is
describing the ID and then the measure
the total sales. So they are not
identical but they have the same pattern
that's why they go and like append them
together. So if you look at this you're
going to say wow this looks nice right I
have all the orders here I have the
measures and I can see the grain so the
measure type that I have in the amount
so things looks clean and with this I
can go and do multiple like analyzes and
I have some dynamic well you can go and
do that of course but you have to be
very careful each time you use this fact
table like for example if you don't
explain this for the others and someone
goes and start like doing a sum of the
amount they're going to go and get like
3,500 and this makes no sense Because
here those numbers they have different
meanings for each row. In one row this
number is a sales but in another row
this number is revenue. So if you go
blindly and do a total sales on this
fact or maybe an average for the sales
you're going to get of course wrong
numbers in the reports and you have
always to be careful that you do the
aggregations based on the grain. And
this of course makes everything
complicated and open the door for many
mistakes. That's why I never recommend
to append it like this. Instead, we go
and merge them. So, you're going to say,
you know what, they are sharing onetoone
relationship. I'm going to go and just
put everything side by side. So, I have
the order ID, I have the customer, the
source, the sales, and the revenue. And
with that, my measures are actually not
mixing together. And it's still very
easy to analyze. Like for example, if I
need to find the total sales, I'm just
going to go to this column over here and
find the total sales. Same thing for the
revenue. So yes, I have wider table and
I have more columns inside my data
model, but doing aggregations and stuff
on the fact it is way easier and safe
compared to the append. So my friends,
in this scenario, if you have two fact
tables that have the same grain like
this, they have one to one
relationships. They are not identical.
So they have like different events or
different columns. Then just go and
combine them, merge them together into
one single fact table. And don't use
append if they are not exactly
identical. Okay. So let's keep moving
now to the third scenario. Things going
to get a little bit more advanced. So
again we have two fact tables. The fact
sales and the fact budget. We have to
start with the first question. What is
the grain? So what each row is
representing in each fact. You can see
that in the fact sales is actually each
row is one order. So it is very simple.
But now if you go to the fact budget you
can see that each row is actually a
month. It is the planned budget for
specific product in a month. So for
example for the product laptop we can
see that in January we have so much
budget and for February we have another
planned budget for it. So that means my
friend the grain is different between
those two tables they have completely
different level of details. Now the next
question are we talking about the same
events the same structure well they are
totally different from each others. The
fact sales here the event is sales is
happening but on the right side planning
is happening. So for each month for each
product we have a planned budget as
well. The structure it is totally
different. Here we don't have any ids.
On the left side we have an order ID. So
those two fact tables they are
completely different. They don't have
the same events. They are not sharing
the grain. They are not sharing the
event or the structure. And now of
course the question is if a business
user ask you to go and compare the sales
versus the budget by the product. So you
need data from those two facts into one
visual. What you have to do? So again we
have the same options. Either we're
going to build a relationship between
them or merge those two facts together
into one single fact. So now let's start
with combining everything together. Here
you have the two options either append
or merge. Well, it makes no sense to
append. Please don't do that unless they
are totally identical and they have the
same grain. But now a mistake that might
happen is that you can see you know what
we have a product on the left side and a
product on the right side. Actually we
can go and merge them together using
this key. So if you go and do that
you're going to get something like this.
So you have the order ID, you have the
month, you have all the products and
then you have the two measures, the
sales and the budget. So with this you
have everything like side by side and
you can go and compare them right. But
my friends those numbers going to makes
no sense at all once you start
aggregating. So if you go and give this
to your business users they're going to
say well actually we didn't plan so much
budget. We don't have like 9,000. We
have planned only 6K. So actually your
numbers are wrong and PowerBI has maybe
an issue. You're going to go to your
data model and check well actually we
have correct numbers we don't have like
wrong data inside PowerBI it's only the
decision that you have made to merge
those two together into one table
because my friend the relationship
between those two fact tables are
actually money to money like for example
on the left side the laptop if you
combine it with a budget you're going to
get actually two plan budget for this
product so you get the January and
February and you're going to have them
as two rows inside the new table and
same thing for example for the order
number three as well It going to connect
to two plan budget the January and
February. So with this you're going to
get the same budget inside the combined
table twice. One for the first order and
another one for the second order. And of
course this is really bad if you combine
two tables that has many to many
relationship. It will just cause
duplicates in the new combined table. So
no, you cannot go and combine those two
tables together. They don't have a key
between them and they have different
grains. So what are the other options?
Well, actually, we can go and build a
relationship between them, right? So,
you're going to start something like
this. You're going to leave them
separated so we don't merge. And you're
going to start picking maybe the product
ID from the fact sales in order to build
the visual and then put the sales for
each product. So, everything so far is
clean. Right now, what is missing is of
course the budget. So, what you're going
to do, you're going to go and relate
those two tables together using the
product. Again, you see here the money
to many relationship between those two.
And then you're going to go and grab the
budget and you put it on the visual. So
now if you go and give this as well to
the users, they're going to as well see
bad numbers in the visual. They're going
to say okay from one side you are
getting the total sales correct not like
the previous one as you merge the two
tables. But my friend that total budget
makes no sense. We didn't plan so much.
So again your report is wrong, your data
is wrong and they will not trust it. So
again you're going to go back to the
data model and you start adding those
numbers. Well it makes no sense. The
data is correct. It's all because you
are connecting directly two fact tables
together. And this can only cause
issues. From one hand, you are totally
depending on the products from the fact
sales. And this is a big issue because
in the fact sales you can see only the
products where sales happens. But maybe
on the budget you are planning for the
future. So you have a new product and
you have a budget for it. But no orders
yet happened to this new product. So for
example here the monitor we have a
budget for it but still we don't have
any sales for it. Now of course this
product now is missing from the report
because you are building the access for
the visual based on the products from
the fact sales. So that means you cannot
count on the products from the fact
sales. Same thing if you say you know
what let's go and use the products on
the right side as well. You will not get
the full big picture like for example
here the mouse we have an order for it
but we don't have a planned budget for
it. So it doesn't matter where you start
building the visual it will not work if
you are connecting two facts together.
And as well same thing since we have
many to many relationship we're going to
get this effect where the budget going
to fan out and you're going to get here
duplicates inside your visual and this
is of course what is causing the big
number of the budget. So actually my
friends we cannot append we cannot
combine we cannot build a relationship
between those two facts. We have only
one solution to make this clean and
that's by introducing something else. So
what we're going to do we're going to
get rid of this bad relationship between
those two facts and we're going to
introduce a new dimension in the middle.
So now you're going to hear a lot of
different names about this dimension
here in the middle. Some people call it
a shared dimension, others call it
confirmed dimension or you might hear
about the bridge table between two fact
tables. You can call it whatever you
want. At the end it is the same concept.
We're going to build one dimension where
it has the single point of truth. So it
is complete and it has all the products
in the business. So here should be
nothing missing. We have the laptop, we
have the phone, we have the monitor and
as well we have the mouse. So all the
products in the business and after that
we connect our facts to this single
dimension and if you do it like this on
one side you're going to get money to
one relationship between the sales and
the dimension and same thing on the
other side between the budget and the
dimension you're going to get one to
many. And now once you start building
the visual things going to be way easy
for the axis you start always from the
dimension in order to make sure that all
the products are inside my visual. So I
have all my four products and the
measures going to come from each fact.
So the total sales going to come from
the fact sales and the budget going to
come from the budget. So with this first
of all you make sure that nothing is
missing right? So we have here the
monitor. We don't have sales for it but
we have a budget for it and we have as
well the mouse where we have a total
sales for it but no budget. So with this
I'm getting completeness in my visual.
Nothing is missing and as well the
numbers going to be correct. There is no
more fan out effect like for the laptop.
things are connecting to my dimension
using the many to one relationship and
this will not cause any duplicate effect
in the visual. So this solution is a
clear win for me. I have the complete
picture. Nothing is missing and as well
my numbers are correct. My friends, if
you see two fact tables, two tables that
they have different grains, then you
have to be very careful. You might see
things that could be related to each
others or could be combined. Otherwise,
you're going to deliver only wrong
numbers. Leave them separated and
connect things only using a shared
dimension. Okay. So now to the last
scenario. This one going to be a little
bit tricky. So I need your full focus.
This is advanced. Again we have two fact
tables. So we have the sales, we have
the budget. We will not go through
everything. They have different grains.
They have different events. But the
thing is they don't connect using the
products. They connect only using a
higher level. So we have the category.
So this is a setup. And now the business
user has the same question. I would like
you to go and compare sales versus
budget but by the product. So again if
you go and build a direct relationship
between those two you're going to get of
course a wrong budget. We said you don't
do that. So instead what we're going to
do we're going to go and introduce the
shared dimension in between and the
shared dimension this time going to be
the category because they are not
sharing products right? They are sharing
category and after that you go and
connect your facts to the new dimension
category. Now the thing is we're going
to still have an issue in the visual
even if we introduce the shared
dimension between because the user is
asking us to compare those two measures
by the products and the products my
friends it's not an information that
exist in the budget right the budget
knows only about the categories and the
categories as I said it is a higher
aggregated level than the products so
that means with the products and the
fact sales we have more details than the
budget and here we have very important
rule to understand we can show a measure
only at the grain that it was recorded
at or a higher level so more summarized.
So that means we can never show the
measure at a lower level than the grain
that is recorded at like for example the
budget was only recorded at the category
level. So we can show only the numbers
at this level or we can roll up if we
remove the categories in order to have
the total budget. But we never can go
down that it cannot go to the budget by
the products because it is not recorded
at this level. And if you use any tool
it going to go only and fake the
numbers. It will not work. So the rule
is very simple. If you have two fact
tables, you can compare them only at the
highest level they share. So that means
if you want to do really this
comparison, we have to do it at the
category level. So yes, we compare the
sales versus budget but by the category.
And don't misunderstand me if you want
to build a visual only for the fact
sales. Of course, you can go and use the
products, but we are talking only about
connecting two facts into one visual.
Here you have to be careful which one is
the highest and only that you can use. I
know this one was an advanced one, but
once you know those rules, then
everything going to be simple. Back to
PowerBI to practice. Again, we are at
our data model. So far, we have only
dimensions around one fact. the fact
sales. Now, what we're going to do,
we're going to go and grab another fact
to the data model and we're going to go
and connect it. So, get a new data CSV
and this time we're going to go and
connect the fact budget. So, let's go
and do this. Okay. So, go and load it.
All right. So, with this we got our new
fact inside our model. And the thing is
I'm going to go and remove the
relationship that PowerBI automatically
created between this fact and other
things. So, let's go and remove it
because now we are dealing with the
facts and we have to be careful. So
first we have to understand our facts
not only the budget but as well the fact
sales. Now in order in PowerBI to
understand the grains and all those
stuff we're going to go to other tab. So
we're going to go to that table view and
let's go to the fact sales. And now of
course we're going to ask the classical
question what each row here is
representing. So we can see that the
order ID, 101 we can see it twice. So we
have two rows for the same ID. So a row
is not representing the whole order. row
is a line of order. This is a really
detailed one. Now let's go and check the
budget. So now look at this. This is
highly aggregated. So each row is
representing actually a month. The plant
budget and the plant quantity for each
product for one month. The fact sales
has a lot of details and the fact budget
is highly aggregated. That means those
two facts have different grains and of
course we cannot go and combine them.
And of course we will not relate them
directly to each others just because we
have here a product ID and as well in
the budget we have a product ID. So we
will not do this where we're going to
grab the product ID from the fact budget
to the fact sales. Look at this. PowerBI
says many to many relationship and as
well we are getting here like a warning
from PowerBI says this is many to many
both of the product ids are not
containing unique values and it's like
[snorts] be careful of this behavior. So
if I go and save it, we are doing now
bad practices by connecting the fact
tables together. So my friends, we will
not do that. So we're going to remove
it. Instead, we need a dimension in
between a bridge, a conform dimension.
And this is going to be our friend, the
dimension product. So let's go and grab
it over here and just put it nicely
between those two facts. So you can see
it is already connected to the fact
sales. So we don't have to deal with
this side. But we have to go and connect
it to the fact pageto. Grab the product
ID and put it on the dimension product.
Look at this. Looks nice. We have many
to one relationship. And that's because
the product ID in the dimension products
is unique. So, looks good. Let's go and
save it. And actually, that's it. Look
at this. We have a nice shared dimension
between two facts. So, one to many
relationship, many to one. And this
dimension is just like shared between
those two facts. So, this is how we
connect two facts together. And now we
can go and use the values of those two
facts inside our visuals and reports.
Let's go and try this out. Now, as we
learned in order to build a visual, we
always start from the shared dimension
which is the dimension products. So, it
is over here. I'm going to go and pick
the product name and only then you start
picking the measures from the facts. So
now let's go and grab let's say the
total sales from the fact sales. So I'm
going to go and drop it here. So this is
the first fact. Now let's go and compare
it by another measure from another fact,
the budget. So we're going to go and
grab the budget sales and drop it on the
view. Look at this. Everything is
working. And now I'm able to do sales
versus budget analyzes. Now of course in
order to test whether you are missing
any numbers, what we can do is that you
can just go and duplicate this view like
twice. One left, one right. And now we
can make one view dedicated only for one
fact. So that means I'm going to go over
here and remove the budget. This going
to be only for the sales. And if the
numbers are exactly the same as the
combined one over here, then everything
is healthy. Same thing on the right
side. This time this going to be
dedicated only for one fact, the budget.
So that means I'm going to go and remove
any value from the other facts. Now look
at this. The total budget is exactly
like the combined one. And this means
everything is working perfectly. So this
is how I test if I'm combining two facts
tables together. You make one dedicated
view for each and see whether the
numbers are matching. And now of course
you can go and check other stuff like by
grabbing other measures to our view and
see whether everything working fine. And
now one more thing that we could
practice that we could actually connect
multiple dimensions as a shared
dimension. So it must not be always like
only one we can go and add more. So that
means if we go and check the facts and
see something in common. So here we have
the month of the budget. So this is a
date. And now if we go to the fact sales
we can see as well let's say the order
date. This is not a month but as well it
is a date and we could like use a shared
dimension called the dimension date in
between. Let me show you how to do it.
So let's go back to the model view. Now
of course we need a dimension date. We
don't have it yet inside our model.
We're going to go and connect something
new. So over here you can see we have a
dimension date. Let's go and load it and
let's go and hit load. All right. So
with this we got a new dimension and I'm
going to put it just in between those
two facts. Now of course in order to
make a share dimension we have to go and
connect both facts to this new
dimension. So for example let's go and
grab the order date and connected to the
date inside the dimension. So as you can
see they are using the same informations
and we have many to one relationship. So
perfect. Let's save it. So this is one
side. Now let's go and connect the other
side. So budget month it goes as well to
the same key to the date. Same story we
have here money to one relationship
which is active and this is nice. So now
with this we have two shared dimensions
between our two facts and this of course
open the door for more analytics between
the two measures inside the different
facts. Now we can compare things by the
dates. Let's go and try this out to the
report view. As usual we start with the
dimension. So the new one is the
dimension date. Let's go and drop it in
the visual. Now here very important to
understand the level of details the
grains. You can see the dimension is
based on the days. So for each day we
have one row. So we have to keep this in
our mind. Now let's go and grab the
measures. It's going to be the again the
total sales. Now look at this and
understand we have for few days a total
sales. So in January we have two sales
and in February we have two days of
sales. With this we can understand that
the level of details of the dates inside
the fact sales is as well the day and
you can check as well that in the table
view you can see the order date always
include like a day. So far everything is
matching. Now let's go to the budget. We
need as well the planned budget for the
sales and drop it on the same view. Now
the first thing that we have to check is
of course the total. So the total budget
is matching over here and as well for
the sales. We don't have to worry about
now wrong numbers. But now if you look
to the table over here you can see there
is something weird right? You can see
that the numbers are not really side by
side. There is like some shifting. Now
if you look closer to the budget you can
see it's always at the first day of the
month. So the 1st of January, the 1st of
February and so on. So we see a budget
only on the first day and for the total
sales we see it in different days.
Sometimes the 5th, sometimes 12th, third
and so on. So we are not really able to
compare the two measures side by side.
And this is my friends because we have
different level of details and grain for
the budget. So we can go and check this
over here. Let's switch to the fact
budget. We see it like the 1st of
January. This is only the format but the
level here is a month and not a day. And
what we have learned before if you have
different level of details, if you have
different grains, you have always to
work on the highest level. Otherwise,
your chart kind of looks exactly weird
like this. So in order to compare now
the budget and the total sales, we have
to bring them together at the same level
where both of them can understand the
level. And this is my friend not the
day. This is the month. That's why I'm
going to go to the date over here and
just get rid of the day. And with this,
we have like a roll up to the month. And
look at this. Now we see things side by
side. So the budget is near the total
sales. That's because both of the fact
tables can work at that same level at
the month. And now things are more
healthy and we can go and compare the
two measures side by side. As you can
see my friends, not only you have to
build a healthy data model, you have as
well to understand the grain of
everything. the grain of the dimensions,
the grain of the facts. Without that,
you're going to build weird reports and
in the worst case you will be reporting
wrong numbers. So now let's recap. So if
two fact tables have the same grain, the
same fact, the same structure, the same
event, then go and just append those two
facts together. But if you have a
scenario where the two facts yes have
the same grain but they have different
shapes and you can build a onetoone
relationship between those two facts
then just go and combine them into one
fact by merging them together. But now
in the other scenario if they have
different grains different shapes
different events. Never combine those
two facts and as well never relate them
directly to each others. Always build in
between a shared or bridge dimension and
connect your facts to it. And at the
visual level if you are comparing two
facts only work at the level that both
facts understand. So always pick the
highest level that both facts can
understand. So my friends once you
understand those rules then it's going
to be really easy to work with facts in
[music] data modeling.
All right friends now we're going to
talk about something really important
for data modeling and as well for real
projects. The security. The thing is in
real projects it is not enough to have a
model that gives correct numbers but
also you have to control who is allowed
to see which data. So that means you
have to make it secure and this is
deeply connected into data moduling. If
you have clean data model then it's
going to be really easy to implement the
security requirement and it's going to
be safe. But if you have a data model
that is messy chaotic the security going
to be really hard to implement and your
data going to leak to the wrong users.
And this is exactly what we're going to
do now. And we start as usual with the
foundations. So what is security in data
moduling? Let's go. Okay. So we have a
table and by default this table has no
security. So that means if we are
building a report on top of it, everyone
all the users going to be able to see
all the data of this table. But now
let's say that we are a real project and
we have to go and apply security on top
of this table. Here we're going to have
like three options. The first scenario
if the whole table is actually contains
a lot of sensitive informations like the
salaries, the contacts, the finance data
and some users are actually not allowed
to access this table at all. So that
means what we have to do in this
scenario we have to go and hide the
whole table everything all the rows and
all the columns and for them this table
is basically doesn't exist. This is what
we call the table level security. Now
the second scenario maybe not that
extreme where you say you know what we
have a table like employees and it
contains a lot of data that are actually
not sensitive but we have like one two
columns that are really sensitive like
for example the salary. So we will not
go and hide the whole table for the
users. What we can do we can go and
protect and hide only one specific
column. So that means the user is going
to be able to see all the data but only
this column going to be hidden for them.
This is what we call the column level
security. Now to the third scenario
which is the most common one in many
projects where we can say actually the
table is totally okay. All the columns
are not sensitive but now it is not
allowed to show all the rows for all the
users. Like for example a salesperson
can only see the region or maybe the
managers are allowed only to see their
own departments. So that means the whole
table can be visible. All the columns
are allowed but the users will not see
all the rows. They are allowed to see
only specific rows. And this is what we
call the very famous rowle security and
you're going to hear a lot of people are
saying RLS. So those are the three
levels of security or hiding things in
data modeling. The table level security
you want to hide the whole table. The
column level security you want to hide
only specific sensitive columns. And the
third one is the role level security if
you want to go and hide specific rows.
Now of course the most common technique
that is used almost in every project is
the role level security. And this is
exactly what we're going to deep dive
now. So we have to understand why and
what. Let's go. Okay. So now we have
this following setup where we have a
table about the sales and a report in
top of it. Now this sales table going to
contain all the sales. So for all
departments or regions. Now the thing is
in companies we have different people
with different roles. Like for example,
we might have like a director that is
actually allowed to see all the data and
we might have another person like for
example a manager that is allowed only
to see the sales for specific
department. So this means not all the
rows only specific one and we might have
a third one. So we have a salesperson
that is allowed only to see the data
based on the region that is assigned to
it like maybe only Europe. So that means
we have three different users with three
different security requirements. Now, of
course, because of this, you cannot go
and just share the report with everyone.
You have to be careful with the security
requirements. Now, one of the ideas is
to go and do this where you're going to
say, "Okay, I'm going to go and
duplicate my report into three files.
I'm going to build a filter specifically
tailored for each role and then start
sharing those reports based on the
role." So, you are making like
role-based reports. But of course I
think it's obvious this is really bad
solution because you have the same
report the same work over and over and
all those duplicates is just because of
one simple filter and of course if you
want to change one thing it going to be
really nightmare you have to go through
all the files and start implementing the
same change again and again. So this
going to be really nightmare to maintain
and it will not work. Now we have
smarter and better solution that instead
of having all those duplicates we're
going to go back to one model and one
reports. But now what we're going to do,
we're going to go and add a rowle
security component on top of the data
model. And it is smart enough to let
PowerBI understand who is looking at the
reports and based on the information
based on the role PowerBI going to go
and filter the data model specially for
that person and this is exactly the best
solution is to implement the relevant
security so that you stick with the one
project without having you to duplicate
things. Now of course the question is
how we going to go and build this smart
component in the data model? how this
works and how to build it. Now, of
course, implementing role security
depend on the tech stack that you are
using. One solution that you might find
rarely in projects where they build a
live connection between PowerBI and
underneath like database or maybe like
data bricks and they decide to build the
whole role security in the back end. So
they build the whole filtering logic in
the database and PowerBI has only to go
and pass the user information to the
back end and of course the backend
system going to return only the rows the
user is allowed to see. So that means
the whole logic going to be built
outside of PowerBI and to be honest this
is something really complicated to do
because now you have two systems the
testing going to be really hard and we
rarely use the live connection between
PowerBI and the backend system. Most of
the times we import the data to PowerBI.
So that's why the second option is to go
and build the role of it security inside
PowerBI and this is the most common
option that we actually build and
implements in real projects and this is
exactly what we're going to learn. So
now how we're going to build this RLS
inside PowerBI and how it works. So now
we have again this setup where we have a
table in the model and this table has a
column called region where you have the
values US and EU. After that we have a
report and then three users are using
this report and accessing it. Now if you
leave it like this then we don't have
security that means everyone is seeing
everything. But now if we cannot leave
it like this and we have to go and
implement the role level security then
of course we cannot go and build some
random filters inside PowerBI. We need
more tools. So the first component or
tool that we're going to use for role
level security is the role and it is a
tool that we're going to use in order to
filter the model. So it's very simple.
It has a name and a value. Now the value
could be either static or a ducks
calculation if you have expression. Now
if you decide for the static values then
you're going to have like two roles
based on the regions one for EU and
another one for US. So this is the rule
and with this PowerBI knows how to
filter the data model based on the role.
But that's not enough of course because
PowerBI is missing another important
information the mapping between the
users and the role. PowerBI doesn't know
whether Maria has the role like us or U.
So we don't have yet this mapping. And
for this you have two options. either
you're going to leave it like this
static where you go and publish the
report to PowerBI service and from there
you start manually mapping which user
belong to which role and now this
PowerBI has everything the two
informations the mapping between the
user and the role and the mapping
between the role and the data model. So
everything is linked. Now if a user like
Maria go and access the reports, what
going to happen? PowerBI first has to go
and check the role and say ahuh she
belongs to the role EU and then go to
the other mapping. Okay, the role EU has
the static value EU and after that it's
going to go to the data model and filter
the data based on this static value. So
this Maria going to see only EU data and
this is my friends what we call the
static role security in PowerBI. Now by
looking into this the role of security
has actually two problems. The first
issue we are creating like a role for
each value inside our data. So here we
have like two values in the region we
have create two roles. But if the
security concept is based like on
another column on another values where
you have 10 and 30 you have to go and
create like 30 rules and if you keep
like getting new values you have to go
and keep expanding and maybe you're
going to go and miss something. And the
second issue, each time we get a new
user, we have always to go to the
PowerBI service. We have to assign those
new users to the different roles. To be
honest, I have never done this in
projects because I had like 3,000 users
and I don't have the time to go and
assign manually each user to each role.
That's why we have another option where
things are more dynamic and we call it
dynamic role level security where we're
going to say we will not do those manual
things but instead we're going to add a
new table to the data model. This is a
special table only for security where it
has two informations which user is
allowed to see which region. So we're
going to see like information for each
user like Maria going to see you and so
on. Now of course the big question is
where this data come from. Now if you
are unlucky you have to go and create it
manually. So you can have your own Excel
where you are mapping the users to the
regions. Again it is kind of manual
work. Or if you are lucky enough and
this is something that really happens a
lot in projects where you're going to
find this kind of information stored
somewhere in your source systems and
this is actually what I usually do. I go
and load the security informations like
any other tables inside my model. So
with that I don't have to map anything
manually and everything going to be
automatic. Now so far we have just like
table and data and PowerBI has no idea
how to do the role of a security. So now
what do we want? We want just to connect
the users to this security table and we
can do that by doing two steps. First
PowerBI has to know who are the users
that are looking at the reports and for
that we have a nice function called user
principle name. It's going to return the
current user that is opening the
reports. So usually going to get the
email address. So with this PowerBI
knows okay who is looking at the report.
Now in order to map this value that is
returned from this function to the
security table we have to go and create
a role. But now of course we will not go
and create a role for each value inside
the table. We're going to make things
more dynamic by creating only one role
and we're going to use some DAX
calculation in order to just map the
value from this function to the security
table. So those are the component and
now let's understand what going to
happen if Maria go and open the reports.
Barbie going to go and execute the
function and understand okay who is that
it's going to get the value. Okay Maria
then Barbie going to go to the role in
order to understand how to filter and
where to go with this information. Then
it's going to say okay we have to go and
filter the security table and this is
very important to understand it is
filtering the security table and not
going directly to the whole data model
and filtering the tables. So that means
only the security table going to get
filtered to Maria and now what's going
to happen this filter going to travel to
our data model. So it is very important
to have a correct relationship between
the security table and your data model.
So this is how it works. This is the
dynamic role level security. And now
let's go and compare the static with the
dynamic side by side. In the static RLS,
we have to go and create multiple roles
based on the values inside our tables.
But for the dynamic RLS, we have usually
to go and create only one role with a
DAX calculation. Now for the static, the
users are assigned to the roles inside
the PowerBI service. But for the
dynamic, the users are mapped inside a
security table inside the model in
PowerBI desktop. Now for the static if
the access change we have to go and
change the assignment in the PowerBI
service. But with the dynamic if access
change we just change the data inside
the security table. And here the
recommendation is if you have like small
projects, small data and only few users
and then go and use the static because
it is more straightforward and it is
easier to implement. But if you have
like more data, you have a lot of users,
you have bigger projects, then the best
practices says go and use the dynamic
role of the security. It is yeah at the
start not that easy to build but you are
investing for the future so things going
to be way faster and dynamic once you
get a lot of users using your reports
and now based on this we will be
focusing on the dynamic role the
security because it is the method that
we usually implement in real projects at
companies. So now since this is
confusing topic and you have to pay
attention to the filters and directions
we're gonna have this very simple
example where we have a fact table fact
sales and two dimensions and now we have
to pay attention to the numbers. So here
we have the total sales of 10K. We have
five customers and five products. So a
very classical star schema. Now of
course anyone that is using this data
model going to see exactly those
numbers. Nothing is filtered unless they
go and make a filter slicer or something
to interact with the report. But if they
don't filter anything, they're going to
see the whole thing. Now of course we
want to make this secure by implementing
the dynamic RLS. And we start with the
first step where we're going to go and
add a security table. Now this table is
just mapping between the email address
of the users and the region and we have
a relationship between this security
table to the fact sales since we have as
well here the region. But now look at
this even if we have the security table
everyone is able to see the 10k. So
adding a security table and build the
relationship doesn't mean the data going
to get filtered automatically. For that
we have to go and add more steps like
for example a rule where it going to
check the user principle name. Now let's
say that after adding the role we have a
user called Alice and she going to go
and now open the report and start
looking at the data. Now suddenly she
will not see the whole 10k as a default.
She going to see only 4k even without
filtering any data in the report and
that's all because of the security role
and as well the security table that is
connected to our fact. But now we have
to pay attention to this. You can see
that she is able to see the five
customers and the five products and
that's all because of the filter
direction. We are not filtering from the
fact to the dimension. It is the
opposite from dimension to fact. So that
means it's going to stop over here and
will not carry out to the other
dimensions. But now if you say you know
what I would like as well to filter the
dimension customers based on the
security then what you have to do is to
just go and change the filter direction
to both. Now look at this. The security
table is filtering the fact and the fact
is actually carrying the filter to the
dimension customer. But with that Alice
going to see 4K and as well only two
customers not anymore the five but the
dimension product is not affected
because here we have one direction but
if you say let's go and filter the whole
data model then as well you have to go
and add like both and with this actually
you are filtering the whole data model.
So that means my friend you have to pay
attention to the filter direction in the
relationships because it's going to
define the behavior of the security of
the whole data model. If you do it wrong
then the whole security will not work
even if you have the best setup like you
have the roles you have the table but
the relationship is wrong. Like for
example if you just switch it like this
where you say the filter direction is
from the fact to the security. Now what
going to happen? The user going to see
the 10k because the data is not
traveling from the security table to the
fact. So whoever like go and look to the
table all of them going to see the 10k.
So that means the filter is not
traveling the whole setup going to be
wrong and you're going to have like
security leak that's why the definition
of the direction going to be very
critical topic. And now for example if
you go and switch to pop has different
scenario where he is mapped to South
America and for that we have like two
orders that means pop can see only 3k
two customers and two products. Now if
you go to Carla, she has the region
east. She can see only three orders and
she can see three customers, three
products. Now of course something that
might happen a lot where you have a user
that is not actually inside your
security table. What going to happen?
This user will not see anything. They
will see total sales of zero, no
customers, no product. Since Dan has no
record inside our security table, he
will be completely blind and will not
see anything. So this is exactly how the
dynamic role level security works. And
as you can see it is something that is
completely depending on the data model
and how things are connected. That's why
building the relevant security it is
part of data moduling. If you do it
wrong then you will not be able to
connect things nicely like now we are
doing. So now back to our data model. Of
course here we have only star schema. So
we have dimensions facts connected to
each others but we don't have security.
Trust means everyone going to see
everything. Now how we going to do it?
Of course we have to do it step by step
and we don't have to rush it. Now I'm
going to show you how to do the static.
It's very simple. So now the first step
we have to understand the security
requirement in our project. So we cannot
go and apply like some random filters on
top of our data based on our like gut
feeling. If you don't know about that
you have to ask your team your
department and usually there is like a
security officer that understand those
topics. Now let's say after some
discussions I understood we have always
to secure our data based on the regions.
So this is very important step because
now I know my goal. I want to secure
this data model based on the region and
not based on the city or the country or
some specific departments and so on. Now
the next step is that we have to
understand where are the regions inside
our data model. So that means I start
going to the table view and start
investigating all my dimensions and
facts to understand where I can find the
region informations. Now for example
here we can see it in the dimension
store. This is very good and in other
tables like the facts the fact sales we
don't see this information. So that I
located the dimension store. This going
to be a very good starting point. So now
that means based on the stores I will be
able to use it in order to secure the
fact table in the middle. So this I know
exactly my target tables and this is
very important in order to build the
relevant security. Now the third step
before I start doing anything I'm going
to go to the report view and then make
like a special view only for testing.
You have always to understand the big
numbers of your data model and
understand the behavior of the role
level security on top of it. Otherwise
you don't know whether you have done
things correctly or not and you might
have some security leaks or maybe are
filtering unnecessary things. So I have
to memorize it in my head. The total
sales in the whole data set is 5500 five
customers six products. So that means I
know the numbers. I know which table is
going to be affected and filtered and I
know how to build the roles. Now since
we are building the static one you have
always to understand the values. So as
you can see here the regions we have
two. That means we need two roles and
those are the values that we're going to
use in order to filter the data model.
So Europe and USA you have exactly to
use those values as it is. So now how we
going to build it? We're going to go
back to the model view. Now in order to
create the roles we're going to go to
the rep points over here and we have
manage roles. It is very simple. We're
going to go from left to right. So we're
going to start by creating the roles.
Now the first one we're going to go and
create the role for EU. And another one
we're going to go and create the role of
US. So now the next step we have to tell
PowerBI which table must be filtered and
as we checked the dimension store should
be filtered because only here we have
the region informations of course if you
have multiple tables then go and select
multiple tables but now we have only one
and now the next step we have to go and
create the filter condition and here we
have two options either we're going to
go and click around if we are creating
the static one or we're going to switch
to DAX in order to create the dynamic
RLS but now we are creating only the
static so I'm going to go and say new
rule it's just a very simple filter
condition so we're going to go and
select the column. It's going to be the
region. And now the value, we're going
to write it exactly like the value
inside our data set. So since this is
Europe, we're going to write it like
this. And it is case sensitive. Now if
you just go and read it from left to
right, we are creating a new role in
order to filter the dimension store. And
this is the filter condition. Region
must be equal to Europe. So that's it.
We have to go and do it again for the
US. Yes, we are filtering the dimension
store. And then we can go and create the
condition. Same thing to the region. And
now the value going to be USA. So
actually it is very easy. That's it.
With that we have created the two roles
and now we can go and save it. So that's
it and then go and close it. Now of
course you might ask okay what happened
now. Go to the report view and check.
You can see nothing changed. So yes we
have created the roles but PowerBI is
not filtering anything yet because in
order to do that we have to go and
publish the report to the PowerBI
service and then start assigning the
different people to the different roles
and then it going to work. But now of
course the question is how we going to
test it? Are we going to go and create
like a dummy user or go and ask someone
to test for us? Well, of course, no. We
have something smarter in PowerBI. All
what you have to do to test is just to
go back to the model view and then we
have in the report as well something
side by side called view as. So, it is
very cool. We can go and view the report
as a specific role. Like for example, I
would like to view the report as the
role you. And this is of course very
cool because now I can test the report
as a person that has this specific role.
So now let's go and do that and say
okay. Now you're going to see this nice
warning. It says now viewing as the role
AU. So very cool. But now of course in
order to know whether this works. We
have always to test by going back to the
report view. And look at this. So you
can see in the fact we are seeing only
the orders with the region Europe not
from USA. You can see as well the total
sale did change. So that means my friend
this role is working. Now let's go and
test the opposite. So I'm going to say
again okay views and then we're going to
go and switch to US and then hit okay.
Now it says viewing as RO US. Let's go
and test. Look at this. Now we are
seeing the orders only from the region
USA. So as you can see it is working.
And now as you might noticed the total
products and the total customers they
are not changing and that's all because
of the star schema relationships that we
have created. You can see the filter
directions are always from the
dimensions to the facts. So that means
the filters will not reach the
dimensions. Now, of course, if you want
to test, we can go and try this out by
going, for example, to the relationship
between the fact sales and the
dimension. Now, of course, we're going
to go to the direction instead of
single, we're going to go and switch it
to both. Now, here we have another
option. It says apply security filter in
both directions. Well, yes, this is
exactly what we want. So, that's it.
Let's go and save. Now, we can see the
filter is in both directions. So, the
filtering should reach now the products.
Let's go and test. Look at this. We
moved from six products to five
products. So that means not only the
fact table is getting filtered by the
role of the security but as well our
dimension. So as you can see my friends
this is the power of the relationships
and the filter directions. We can
control which tables must be secured
based on the security requirements. So
actually you have it. This is how we
create a static role security. Now of
course let's move to that dynamic one.
So now how we going to do it? First of
all I'm going to go and remove all those
stuff. So we don't need you. Same thing
for you. And then reset everything back.
Now before I start creating any roles,
we actually need a security table. So I
need a mapping between a user and their
regions. Now there is like two options
for that again. Either you load it from
outside or if it's like only few users,
you can go and enter data for that. But
for this I have prepared something for
you. So if you go and connect a new CSV,
there is here a table called security.
Let's go and connect it. So now look at
this. We have user emails and the
regions. Now we can see that the first
row is actually not the header. So
[clears throat] that's why I'm going to
go and transform the data quickly. And
all what you have to do is to just use
first row as a headers. All right. This
looks way nicer. Now let's go and close
and apply. All right. So with this we
got our new security table. Of course
the next step we have to go and connect
it to our data model. So we're going to
go through the dimensions. We're going
to connect the regions per region. Okay.
So now here we have like many to many
relationship which is totally fine. What
is very important is the filter
direction. So we have to pick this. The
security filters the dimension store.
This is very critical to do it correctly
otherwise it will not reach our data
model. So actually that's it. Let's go
and save it again. Look at this. The
arrow is moving from the security to the
dimension and the dimension is moving to
the facts. This is very important one.
All right. So now if you go of course to
the report view, you're going to see all
the data. PowerBI don't know yet how to
use the security table. So nothing
actually going to happen. That's why
we're going to go back to the model
view. And of course comes the magic.
We're going to go and create a new role.
So again manage roles this is not static
we are working on the dynamic we will
not go and create like a role for each
region it is enough to have only one. So
let's go and create one and let's go and
call it regional access. Now of course
the question is which table should be
filtered based on this role. It's again
the same thing the dimension store. And
now since the dynamic it is little bit
more advanced we will not go and create
here a new rule. It is not a simple
filter. We're going to go and switch to
DAX in order to write the filter
expression for PowerBI to understand how
to filter the dimension. Okay. So now
let's do it step by step. We just want
to create the filter condition. And the
first question is what we are actually
filtering. We are filtering the regions
inside the dimension store. So that
means I'm going to go and write it like
this. The region inside the dimension
store should be equal to the following
value. Now if you are just creating like
a static RLS, it's going to be like
this. So equal to Europe or USA. But
actually we will not do that. We want to
make things dynamic. Now the first thing
that we have to decide is actually we
will not go and use the equal operator.
We're going to go with the in. And
that's because one user might have
multiple regions. So that means we might
have a list and in order to filter using
a list we have to use an n operator not
an equal. Equal is only for one value.
Now the regions should be filtered based
on the other table. The security. So
that means we have to get the values of
the security in the filter and we can do
that using the function calculate table.
So we're going to tell PowerBI go and
grab the values from another table based
on a filter. So that means we're going
to go and use the values and actually we
need the security region. Perfect. With
that we are getting the regions from the
security but of course I don't need all
the regions. I need only the regions of
specific user that is actually opening
the reports. That's why we have to go
and build a filter. And of course comes
now the magic the most important thing
we're going to say filter the emails
inside the security but based on the
email of the person that is actually
looking at the reports and for that we
have the very nice function user
principle name. This function will just
return the email address of the current
user. So with that we will not get all
the regions from the security only for
the one that is looking at the report.
And actually that's it. So now let's
read it again. filter the regions inside
the dimension store based of the values
of the security regions but of course
not all the regions only for the regions
that are equal to the email address of
the current user so this is exactly how
we build a dynamic role level security
now we can go and verify the DAX looks
good we're going to go and save it and
actually that's it we have only one role
we are filtering one dimension and we
have a dynamic flexible expression so
let's go and close it of course we have
to test if you go to the report view.
You can see nothing is changed. We still
have all the orders. Of course, the
effect is going to happen once you
publish to PowerBI service. Again, we
will not go and ask a user to test for
us. We can test it directly in the
desktop. So, we just need like an email
address to test. I'm going to go to the
security and go and pick Maria. I'm just
go and copy the value. Now, in order to
test, we're going to go to the model
view and then view us. Now, again, we're
going to go and activate the regional
access and then say okay. Now, as usual,
we're going to see this warning. And now
we are viewing as the regional access.
Of course, we have to test. If you go to
the report view, we will not see
anything. Well, what is going on? Now
the thing is PowerBI is trying to get my
email address that is currently looking
to the report and try to filter the data
based on that. And since I don't have my
email address inside my data, this is
just like fake one. I will not find any
match over here. And it going to say
okay, you are not allowed to see
anything. That's why I cannot see
anything in the fact table, which is a
good thing of course. But in order to
really test this is not a bad effect.
We're going to go to the view as and
this time we're going to say other user
not my user. So I would like to see the
report as Maria is looking to the
report. So we're going to go over here
and put her email. So that I'm going to
see exactly how she can see the report
and say okay. Now you can see now
viewing as a regional access and the
email address. So Maria now let's go and
test to the report view. Look at this.
Now we can see only Europe data and
that's because Maria has access only to
the region Europe. So this is perfect.
Now let's go and test another user. So
we're going to say okay not Maria this
going to be John and then okay. You can
see now we are viewing as John. Let's
see what he can see. Well John has
access only to region USA. That's why
the report is now showing only USA
region. So this is exactly the dynamic
the report the data model going to be
filtered exactly for specific user and
if the user doesn't exist like the one
that I had at the start then the user
will not see anything. Now let's go and
test the fake one that we had. So I had
another one called bar which has of
course all the access of all regions.
Now we can see okay we are viewing the
data as bar Gmail. Now let's go and
test. You can see now I'm able to see
multiple regions which is totally okay.
So even if a user like me with multiple
access to multiple regions the role
level security is working because we are
using the in operator and actually my
friends that's it. This is how we create
a dynamic role level security in PowerBI
by using a very simple expression index.
All right friends, so now let's do a
quick recap. Security is a very
important part in data moduling. Do the
data moduling correctly. Then it's going
to be really easy to build a security on
top of it. Security have three types.
Table level, column level, and rowle
security. Of course, the most common one
that is used in project is the rowle
security RLS. It's all about how to
filter the rows of your tables to show
only the allowed rows. And there are
actually two ways on how to build the
row level security. We have the static
RLS to filter only the rows based on a
static value. It works great if you have
a small projects with few users. But if
your project is growing over the time,
then you have to switch to more flexible
way by building a dynamic RLS where
you're going to filter the data based on
users not static values. And in order to
do that, we need some extra stuff like
for example a security table where it
going to map the users to specific
values of your data model. Then you have
to be very careful how to connect this
security table to your data model by
using the right direction of the
filters. Otherwise, nothing going to
happen. And the last step, we're going
to go and write a very simple DAX
expression in order to let PowerBI know
how to filter your data model based on
the security values. Of course in real
projects we don't rush and build the
role securities. We have always to do it
step by step and slowly. So first we
have to understand the security
requirement in our domain. Usually we go
and ask a security officer or someone
that knows about those topics. We don't
go and randomly apply security stuff
inside our data model that is totally
maybe unnecessary. So don't follow your
guts about this. Always ask and make
sure that you are implementing what is
needed. Once you understand the
requirements then understand where you
can apply it inside your data model.
Don't try to force it in all tables
unless it's needed. And of course, not
only that as well, your filter should be
able to reach those tables and
dimensions. But again, we secure only
the things that is required. We don't
have to go and like secure every single
table inside the data model. So don't
make your life hard if it's not
required. And what is very important, we
always have to test. That means you have
to know the big numbers of your data
model by heart and you have always to
test the effect of the RLS. So actually
that's it. This is the role of security
in PowerBI. I know that was not an easy
one. This is an advanced topic. But once
you understand it, you can go and apply
it [music] to any project.
Hey friends. So now we're going to do
something amazing. We're going to go and
build data model projects in PowerBI
exactly like I do in my real projects.
The thing is I have been involved in
many PowerBI projects at my work that
had bad struggle with the performance
and as well delivering wrong numbers.
But after investigating it was not the
dashboard was bad or ducks. Almost each
time it was the bad model underneath the
reports. So that's why I have prepared
for you for this project a nightmare
data set that looks exactly like the one
that I have seen in companies. Full
chaos, bad shapes, bad data models and
as well bad relationships. So now what
I'm going to do, I'm going to walk you
through this data model step by step
exactly like I do in my real project. So
that at the end we're going to get a
healthy data model that is ready for
reporting. And yes, this is the best way
to learn data modeling by doing
projects, not just like watching
disconnected videos. So that at the end,
you develop like a feeling for the whole
process end to end. And very important,
you don't just watch me doing the
things, you always work with me. So for
each step, you pause the video, you do
it at your end, and then you continue.
All right, my friends. So this is going
to be fun project to do. And now let's
get started.
>> Battle stations, everybody. Let's go,
go, go, go, go, go. Okay, so now before
we jump in, I'm going to show you the
project faces for the data moduling. So
first we have to prepare. We're going to
open the mess. We're going to set up the
workspaces in power query and then we're
going to start investigating. So we're
going to start exploring and have basic
understanding of the tables. What is the
business? What are the entities? Which
one are good candidates for dimensions?
Which are for facts. So we're going to
develop like a big picture in our head.
The second phase we start building. So
we start building the dimensions. We're
going to find like a group of tables
that relate to each others and turn them
into clean dimension. So we keep
iterating until we build all the
dimensions for the data model. Then the
third step we're going to start building
the facts and connect the dimensions to
them. So we take all those event tables
and start building the fact. And after
that we connect all the dimensions to
our new facts and start testing of
course so that the numbers never break
silently in our data model. And then the
last phase is going to be the polishing
phase. We're going to go and add
security to our data model and then we
do like final test to validate the whole
data model. So this is the whole project
those are the phases that we're going to
go through and as well before we start
like building anything we have to keep
in our mind those rules we're going to
follow them from the start to the end no
matter which step we are in. So the
first rule or goal is to build star
schema fact table in the middle
surrounded by dimensions and we never
connect fact table together. The second
rule we have always to understand before
do any changes specially we have to
understand always first the grain of
each table. We have always to say it
loud in order to understand the grain
otherwise we're going to build wrong
dimensions and facts. Now the third rule
every info every column inside our data
model must earn its place. So that means
if we find any column that is not really
needed for analytics and reporting we
have to go and drop it. And that's
because of two reasons. First of all,
they are wasting space inside our
PowerBI file. If you have a lot of
unnecessary columns, your PowerBI file
going to be really heavy and hard to
refresh and hard to move. So that's why
we remove them to have some space. And
the second and more important, they
going to confuse you during building the
visuals and reports. So if we find
anything unnecessary, we just go and
drop it. We can always go and bring it
back if we need it. Rule number four, we
always have to protect the numbers. We
must know by heart the totals of our
data model so that each time we do like
a change or we connect something new. We
go and check those numbers to make sure
that they don't break. And now we come
to the final rule or let's say big step
we have to make sure that we are
following standards that we have to
define before starting the projects. And
of course those standards we can define
them from one project to another depends
on the requirements. But for this
project the standards going to be like
this. First of all we have to define the
language. Yes, this sounds like simple
but I saw a lot of projects where they
are mixing languages in the data model.
So yes, the language going to be here
English. Then we have to follow the same
naming convention for the table and the
columns. And of course there are a lot
of naming conventions but for these
projects we're going to follow the snake
case. All letters, all characters are
lowered and they are separated with
underscore. Now as well you have to
define the prefixes and the suffixes.
Like for example in the table names if
we have a fact table we can have the
prefix fact core. Like for example fact
sales and if it is dimension is going to
be dim shortcut for dimension like only
three letters underscore then the
dimension name like for example dim
customer this is really important
because I saw a lot of confusion if a
lot of people are working on the same
powerbi project one going to call it d
customer and another developer going to
call it dimension customer so we have to
set up the standard for our projects
before we start building now about the
columns we as well could bring some
standards like For example, the
surrogate keys, anything that we create
inside the data model going to ends with
the suffix underscore key like for
example customer key, product key. So
once you see in the data model, okay, it
ends with the underscore key that means
we created that. It is not a natural key
that cames from the source like for
example the customer underscore ID. This
is something comes from the source file
and the customer underscore key it is a
surrogate key that we just created in
the model. So that you have understand
the different types of your keys in the
model. Now the last rule we have to make
everything friendly. So that means we
have to give for everything the table
name, the column name, even some values
inside our tables friendly meaningful
name. So that once you start building
the reports the values can be friendly
and everyone can follow the reports. We
don't bring any cryptical shortcut
technical names that we inherited from
the source systems. So this is the
setup. Those are the faces, the rules,
the mindsets that we're going to follow
through the whole project. Now, let's
get started with our PowerBI project.
All right, friends. So, now I'm really
glad to present you the nightmare data
set that you're going to use for this
project. Have a look to this beautiful
chaos because my friends, there is high
chance if you join a company, join
PowerBI projects that their data model
looks exactly like this. I have seen
this in many projects where the data
model makes no sense. You cannot see
like a star schema here. Many to many
relationships between tables. The filter
direction is like everywhere and that's
all because people skip the data
modeling step. They just connect the
source systems to PowerBI and jump
immediately to the visuals to the report
dashboards. They just want to build
fancy reports for the end users. But of
course, after a while once they start
sharing the dashboards, the users can
understand all the numbers makes no
sense. they usually come back to this
model and start fixing the data model in
order to bring better numbers. So my
friends what I have done for the
preparations I brought all the scenarios
from my project and build this nightmare
data set in order to cover all the
scenarios that you might face in the
projects. So our goal is to turn this
into a healthy star schema bring correct
numbers and as well has good
performance. [music]
Okay. So now we're going to start with
the phase number one the preparation.
That means first we have to have good
understanding about the content of those
tables. So what is the business? What
are the entities? Which tables are good
candidates for dimensions? Which are for
facts. So basic understanding about what
we have and we don't have like to deep
dive into each small detail just to
develop a feeling about the business
about the data and after that we're
going to do like few setups in the power
query as a preparation for the project.
So now let's start let's understand what
you have here and I will not go through
all the relationships because we're
going to break the data model and anyway
we have like to build the relationships
again. So just basic understanding of
the tables and we're going to do that by
going to the table view. So we're going
to start from the top to the addresses.
So what do we have here? We have an
address ID, street, city name. So it's
all about the geographic, the addresses
and maybe for the customers or
something. So this is for the first
table. Let's go to the second one. The
campaign log. Okay, this one is a little
bit bigger. So here we have the
[clears throat] campaign name, the
channel, start date, end date, a budget,
impressions, click and spend. So it's
all about our marketing campaign day by
day. So this looks like an event and
this is really good candidate for a
fact. So we have numbers, we have dates.
Now let's go to the third one. We have
the campaign SKUs. This one looks
compacted. So we have the campaign name
again. And for each campaign, we have
like a list. And I think those are the
products that we have in the business.
So that means this table shows us what
are the products that were involved in
the campaign. And of course this is not
easy one to consume because the list is
usually bad for reporting and we can see
as well the column names are not correct
and we can find them in the first row
inside our table. Of course we have to
clean those up. Now let's go to another
table the cities. So what do we have
here? We have again the cities and as
well the regions. So this is again a
part of the informations about the
geography, the locations, the addresses.
This is of course a descriptive
informations and we're going to need
those stuff as a dimensions. Now let's
go to the next one. We have the custom
master. So it looks like this is our
customer table. So we have customer ID,
customer name, segments, the address ID.
So this is the first connection to our
addresses. Then we have like people, the
account manager, payment terms, some
hash keys and source ids. Those stuff
comes from the sources. But now look at
this. The customer name is not actually
like a person. They are companies. Like
here for example we have the Atlas
industries. So that means this is a very
important table for the customers and
our business is B2B. So that's all for
this one. Let's go to the next one. We
have the customer contacts. So what do
we have here? We have again the customer
ID, the contact name, the emails is
primary. Now you can see for each
customer like for each company we have
multiple contacts which makes sense of
course because our customers are
companies and usually we have to deal
with multiple people in the same
company. So this is all about who we
talk inside each company. Let's go to
the next one. We have a dimension
underscore order. So this one looks
really garbage. We have only one column
and no context to it. So we have some
kind of ids that actually we cannot
relate to anything so far. So I think
this is junk. This is something that we
could drop. So we just faced our first
garbage inside the data model. Let's go
to the next one. We have the exchange
rate. So what do we have here? We have
the currency, the rate and as well the
date. So this is as well information
about our business. Let's keep going to
the inventory. So now what do we see
here? We see the product names and for
each month we have like numbers. So this
all about the inventory. So that means
how much stock we are holding month by
month. And here we have like a whole
year. So for each month we have one
column. All right. Let's move to the
next one. We have the invoice lines. So
here we have like an invoice line, an
invoice ID, product and amount. So that
means we have invoices in our system and
those are the details about each invoice
and that brings us to the next table the
invoices and here we see like the master
table for the invoices. So we have the
invoice ID the order ID the customer
name the invoice date and the amount as
well. So this looks an event a good
candidate for a fact table. So it is
connecting to other things like the
invoice ID the order ID the customer
name to the customer table. We have a
date and numbers. And if we need more
details about the invoices, we have the
other table that we just checked, the
invoice lines. So we just puted another
fact. Now let's move to the next one. We
have the order line items. So again
sounds similar to the invoices. We have
the details about each order. So for
each order we have like lines and order
ID. And this time we are connecting to
the product names. So finally we see
here the products and then we have here
some numbers like the quantity, the
price, the cost, discount and total
sales. So those are the details for each
line. Now we're going to go to the
orders. So we have here two orders where
the orders are splitted by the year. So
for 2025 we have here a lot of things.
So here we have an order ID, a legacy
reference, customer name, customer city,
region. So again we have like some
repetitions inside our data set to which
city we're going to ship to which city
we're going to pill. So we have here
different cities. Then we have the date,
the order date, the order channel and a
lot of columns in this table. So again
this looks like a big table for a fact
because here we have an events each line
is about an order but as well at the
same time we have a lot of context
inside these facts. So this is a
gigantic one for the 2025 and I think
the 2026 looks exactly the same. So they
are just getting splitted. All right. So
this is our third fact I believe but
inside it we have a lot of dimensions
that we could extract. Now let's go to
the next one. We have the payments. So
this one is a small one. We have the
payment ID, the invoice ID, customer
name, date and amount. Again, looks like
transactions events. So this sounds like
a fact table as well. And now to the
next one which is really important, the
products. Finally, we have a dimension.
So what do you have over here? We have
the product code, the name, the brand,
the subcategory, the price and many
other descriptions for the products. So
this table holds the context for the
business products which is a classical
one for a dimension. Let's go to the
next one. We have the regions. Well,
again we have informations about the
region and as you can see we are
operating globally. North America,
Europe, Asia. So our business is
everywhere. Now let's go to the next
one. We have the sales targets. So we
have a row for each month and as well
the target revenue. So it looks like
someone planned the budget the revenue
for each month. And this is a classical
use case where we're going to compare
the target to the actual sales that we
have in the transactions. So for sure
we're going to need this. Now let's go
to the next one. We have the security.
This is really important one. So here we
can see the user email and the region.
So we can see each employee which region
they are responsible to. And of course
this is a perfect table that we're going
to use in order to build the role level
security. So we have to keep our eyes on
it. Now let's go to the next one. We
have the sheet one. Weird name right? I
think this is like something wrong here.
So we have the shipment ID, order ID,
mode, ship day, delivery date. So all
informations about the delivery. So we
can see for each step how and when
orders get out. Okay, interesting one.
But we have to rename the table. Now
let's go to the next one. We have the
shipments. Well, those two tables are
identical. And yes, I think the sheet
one is an import problem. And this is a
classical thing that happens inside the
data model that you have like two tables
that are identical and you have to get
rid one of them. So this is not really
good. Now let's go to the subcategories.
So very simple one we have here like
mapping between the category and the
subcategory. Of course, this is going to
help us in order to organize our
products later. Now, let's go to the
last table, the user details. So, we can
see here for each user we have like
credit limits and a phone number. Well,
of course, this is confusing which user
we are talking about. I think this going
to be for the customers. If you go and
check the customer master, well, yes, we
have like the same patterns in the ID.
So, those are more details for the
customers. So, that means in the data
sets we are using like two names.
sometimes users, sometimes like
customers. Of course, we have to deal
with that. All right, my friends. So
that's it. We just visited all the
tables. We developed like a feeling
about the business. What are the
entities, what are good candidate for
dimensions? Of course, here the big
dimensions going to be the customers and
the products. And as well, we have a lot
of events happening in the business. So
we have a lot of facts. We have
invoices. We have orders. We have
payments. And as well, we have
shipments. So campaign. So a lot of
events are happening in the business.
And this is going to be really
interesting on how to make a data model
out of this and how to connect things
together. So as you can see my friends
this is really important step. We have
to get a feeling about the data before
we change anything. The more you explore
the more you analyze you build this
understanding about the data about the
domain and it's going to be easier for
you later to understand the grain and
how to build the dimensions and facts.
The more you invest in this phase the
less errors and mistakes you're going to
do in the data moduling. Now, of course,
I have done this quickly because I have
built these data sets. But I really
recommend you to pause the video and go
through them one by one, understand its
contents. If you have done this already,
now we're going to go and do a last step
in this phase where we're going to
prepare the power query because we're
going to work a lot with the power query
in order to shape the data model. Not
everything going to be like connected.
We have sometimes to merge, append, and
as well clear some quality issues. So
now let's go to power query. As usual,
we go to transform data. Now of course
in this phase we will not go now and
transform or change any table. All what
we want is to just organize it because
the thing is as you start like building
the data model you will be creating new
tables references and quickly the
queries over here going to go in chaos.
So you will not remember which tables
are the source table which tables are
the new one that you just created. So
this going to get out of hand quickly
especially if you have like big model
like this. Now of course there is like
no best practices how to organize your
project but I'm going to show you how I
usually do it. So everyone does it in
their own way on their own style but
this is how I like to do it. So I start
by creating a new group. So new one and
we're going to give it a name. So I like
like numbering the folders just to sort
it on the left side. So the first one
going to be the stage. So the stage
going to be the folder that going to
contain all the row queries as it is
from the source systems. So that mean is
my friends all those queries that we see
now on the left side going to be inside
this folder. So that I know okay all the
row stuff are living inside this folder.
with that we don't mix it with new
tables that we generate. So let's go and
create it. Now you can see PowerBI put
everything under other queries which is
a good thing. Now I'm going to go and
select everything and drag and drop them
on the new folder. So this my new folder
the stage contains all the row sources.
So this is the first folder. We're going
to go and create another one and we're
going to call it two dimensions. Now,
this is going to be an empty folder for
now because we're going to put inside it
the new dimensions that we create from
the stage like the customers, the
products and so on. So, that means if I
want to go and do something for the
dimensions, I go immediately inside this
folder and I'm going to see it. Now,
usually after I build the dimensions,
I'm going to go and build the facts.
That's why the third one going to be the
fact folder. So, same thing, any fact
that I build from the stage, it going to
land inside the folder facts. Of course,
you can go and put them together like
maybe call it the data model where the
prefix is going to decide for you
whether it's fact or dimension. But I
like to split it like this in order to
have like a quick access. Now we're
going to go and create a last one. So a
new group. We're going to call this for
support. Now in our data model, we're
going to have some tables that don't
belong to dimensions and facts. Like for
example, the security stuff or maybe
some like data that we insert. So
anything that don't belong to dimensions
and facts going to go to this folder,
the support. Now you might ask okay why
do we have the support if we have like
another folder called others right we
could use it as well but the other
queries has different job so in case we
connected any new tables any new sources
to our data model it going to land
inside the other queries they are like
tables that are in my to-do list that I
have to work on so my friends this is
how I usually organize my power query in
order to build the data model out of the
row tables now look at this we have 23
tables inside the stage and nothing
inside other tables of course As we
progress in the projects, we're going to
take all those tables and put them
inside the different folders. We have to
grab all those stuff and start building
the data model. All right, friends. So,
that's what's for the phase one. We have
now basic understanding about the
content, the tables, and we have
prepared our projects to start building.
Finally, we're going to kick off the
phase two where we start building the
dimensions.
This is how we're going to do it. So,
we're going to have like a loop. We're
going to go through each dimension where
we're going to grab a group of tables
that describes the same thing. So the
same entity. So all tables that have the
same context for something like a
customer. So what we're going to do,
we're going to go and pull them
together, reshape them into one clean
dimension if it's possible. And we're
going to do whatever it takes. So we're
going to split, merge, append, fix, drop
until we get the shape of a dimension.
And of course before we move on to the
next one we have to polish the dimension
to make sure that we are following the
standards that we agreed on the starts.
So the snake case names the table names
the prefixes the suffixes everything.
Once it is polished then we go to the
next dimension. So my friends this is
the whole loop. We pick tables build
clean it to the standards and then we
move to the next one. But I'm going to
warn you from now you might find
yourself that you are repeating the same
steps over and over for each dimension.
And guess what? This is the part of the
job. This is the nature of things how we
build data modules. And with each
iterations, of course, you're going to
be faster. So now let's start building
our dimensions.
>> Let's go build an airport.
>> Okay. So now let's start with the first
dimension. And here we have to go and
pick like one topic or entity. And I'm
going to start with the big elephant in
the data model. We have the dimension
customer. So we're going to go and build
it. Now how we going to do it? We go and
pick all the tables that are related to
the customers and turn it into one
dimension. So now based on what we have
learned we have a lot of tables but
obviously the biggest table that's going
to gives us context about the customers
is the customer master. So now what I
usually do is that in this scenario
since we have like a lot of chaos over
here it's like a basel game. I'm going
to go and grab all those tables that are
related to the same topic and move them
to one section in the model. So for
example here the table customer master
I'm going to go and grab it over here
just in order to get like feeling of
progress over the time. Now what is the
other table that actually gives us more
context about the customers? We had the
contacts. So it is over here the
customer contacts and at the end we
found like a table the user details
where we get like phones and emails as
well. This one gives us some context
about the customers. Now there is a
topic that actually could be relevant
that the addresses. Each customer has an
address. Of course here the question is
whether we make like an extra dimension
for the addresses or we merge everything
inside the customer. So I'm going to say
let's go and group them as well together
with the customers. So this is the
addresses over here and for the
addresses we saw as well some other
related tables for the locations. So we
had like the cities it is over here and
as well we had the regions. So this
could be as well interesting. So now by
looking to this we have like three
tables about the customers and three
tables about the addresses. So now I
know okay on the top right I have the
dimension customers and my goal is to go
and turn all those tables into one
single dimension. So as you can see our
data model is getting like maybe slowly
less chaotic but we are not there yet we
didn't start. So now in order to change
the shape of the tables of course we
have to go to the power query. Now in
this scenario where we have a lot of
tables I usually start with the
foundations with the biggest table
that's going to gives us a lot of
context about the customer and the one
table that let's say has a completeness
like has all the customer and I'm going
to say this is very obvious it's going
to be our customer master here we have a
lot of columns about the customers and
this is very good starting point so now
before we do anything we will not go and
change now directly the shape of this
table we have to go and make a reference
out of it so that I can work on a copy
let's say and leave the row data as it
is. Maybe later we're going to need as
well this table for something else.
That's why I usually go and say okay
let's go and build a reference out of
this. So we have it over here and then
drag and drop it to the dimensions. All
right. So now let's minimize this. The
next step we have to go and rename it.
And here we have to be really careful
with our rules. So we said we have a
prefix for each dimension called dim and
we are using the snake case. So
everything should be lowered. Actually
that's it. This is our first dimension.
Now let's have a look. What do we have
here? We have a lot of context about the
customers. And how many customers do we
have? We have 61 customers. And this is
really interesting. The last row is 999.
And it sounds like a test customer. So
this is like a dummy information that
came from the source system. And I'm
going to say we have to get rid of it.
So I'm going to go and filter this data
out. And we can do that very simply by
going to the filter over here and search
for the ID. And then all what you have
to do is to just unmark it. That's it.
So now by looking to this we have 60
customers inside this table. This is the
foundations. We have to keep this in our
mind because as we start adding more and
more things to this table we have to
make sure that everything stay unique
and we stay with the 60 customers. So
now we have the foundations. Now let's
go and look to the other tables. So we
have the customer contacts. So over here
we have the ID, the name, the email and
is primary. So we have here more context
about the customers. And of course it
makes sense to go and put those
informations side by side with the other
context. So with the dimension customer
and how we do that we go and merge the
two tables. So it is very simple. We're
going to go to the dimension customers
and say okay let's merge the queries
together. So dimension customer and the
next one it's going to be the customer
contacts. The ID going to be the
customer ID and the left join. Make sure
it is always left. If you use inner you
might lose data from the main dimension.
We don't want that. So okay. Now we get
it like a new column over here. we have
to expand and select exactly what do we
need. So we need the name, the email and
is primary. So with this we got our
three columns side by side with the
other context. Now it is very important
once you add once you merge new data
inside your table you have to make sure
that everything stay correct. That means
the data is not fanning out or let's say
getting duplicated. Now if you go and
check here we had 60 customers. But now
as I scroll down, we have way more than
60 customers. And that's because the
same ID is keep repeating over and over.
And of course, that's all because the
new merge table that we have attached to
this table. So that was a really bad
merge between those two tables. And this
is exactly what you have to be careful.
But merging is not destroying your
dimension or maybe your fact. Now of
course the question is why did this
happen? Because my friends, we are
merging two tables with different
grains. So again the customer contacts
each row doesn't represent one customer
each row is representing one contact for
the customer. So here for example for
the second customer we have four
contacts. So the grain is different from
the customer master. Here each row is
really representing only one customer.
And once you merge different grains you
get this bad effect. So of course the
question is how we going to solve this?
Well there is like different ways on how
to do it. You can say you know what we
can go and convert this table into the
grain of customer. So that means each
row represent one customer and what do
we do with the contacts? We make like a
list of contacts. It's like we are
grouping up or let's say aggregating
this table to the level of the customer.
And of course we can do that if you go
to the transform and then group by the
columns by the customer ID. Another
solution that you might say you know
what this is the contact of the
customers and we can make another
dimension out of it and then make a
relationship between this new dimension
and the customer or a third solution
that you might say you know what let's
not go and add all the contacts inside
the customer dimension let's just add
the primary contact so for example for
the second customer we have here like
four people only one of them Sara is
actually the primary contact for this
customer and if that is okay for the
analyzes and the reports then we can go
and merge actually this table to the
customers again. But of course we have
to make sure that we really have like
one primary contact for each customer.
We can do that by filtering the data for
example over here and say show me only
the primary contact. So of course this
dimension is very small. You can go and
check like by eyes and see with this I
have exactly 60 customers and I don't
have like any duplicates in the primary
key. So now again my grain over here is
one row is one customer and the
relationship between the customer
contacts and the dimension customer is
again one to one and this is very safe
in order to do a merge. So now since we
filter the data like this let's go and
check our dimension customer. Now let's
see again we have here a clean dimension
where we have only 60 customers and on
the right side of course we have our
primary contacts for each customer. So
with this finally it is safe to merge
those two tables into one. Now of course
we are just checking by looking right
whether there's duplicates or not. There
is like smarter way on how to do it that
you go to the primary key the customer
ID and you group up the data by the
rows. So you say here group by and you
just say okay count and here the
operation going to be count rows. So if
you go and say okay of course the data
going to get grouped up by the rows and
if you see it like this where the count
is everywhere is one then my friend you
don't have any duplicates and you are
okay. Of course, you can go and check
for here. And you can see, okay, we have
only one value, the one. So, this is
something that I do each time I merge
two tables together to check quickly
whether we have duplicates or not. But
of course, this is only for checking.
So, I'm going to go and remove it. All
right. So, that's what the first lesson.
Be careful for the grains. If you are
merging things together now, let's go
and check the third table. We had the
user details. Right now, again, we have
more context to the dimension customer.
We have the limits and the phone. That
means we have to go and merge those
informations to our new dimension. But
this time we have to be careful. Do we
have here the same grain? Well, by
looking to this, I'm going to say we
don't have here any duplicates. Each row
representing one customer. So this one
going to be really easy. I'm going to go
to the table customers. Same thing.
We're going to go home and then merge.
Find our table was at the end. So user
details. Now things here getting
interesting about the entity. We have
here the user ID. But in other table
they call it user ID. We have of course
to talk about this because we have now
like two different names for the same
entity right but first let's go and
merge things together and of course we
have to expand. So we just need the new
informations credit limit and the phone.
And again before we celebrate having
more data inside our dimension we have
to go and check whether everything is
unique and we don't have duplicates. So
looks really good. Now before we
continue with the other tables and
building the dimension I still don't
like it that we found out inside our
data we have like two names for the same
entity. We had the customer and as well
the user. So of course what is the
through how we going to call this
dimension customer or dimension user.
This happens a lot of course by the way
in the companies where you have
different departments calling the same
entity different names. In one
department they call all the customers
as users and other is customer. So of
course this is always a dilemma as you
are building a data model especially if
you are connecting like multiple sources
inside one model inside your projects.
Now of course one idea could be let's go
and ask the business users who are using
the report which name they want to use.
Now the thing is if you are asking a
business user from specific department
they might say you know what we use
customers then I want to see it in the
report as well as customers. But if you
go and ask another department another
business they might say use the user. So
still it is dilemma and they will not
really help you in order to decide for
your data model. You cannot go and use
both of them. That's why you have to
have like feeling about the data model.
If you have a lot of tables are using
the customer as an info, then go with
the customer. Like here in our example,
most of our tables are using this term
customer and only like one table is
using the user. That's why I'm going to
decide for our data model to go with the
customer as an entity name and let's say
ignore the user as a term. So now let's
go back. So that means we're going to
stick with the name dimension customer.
We will not rename anything. Now let's
go back to the other three tables. Now
the next batch of tables, they are all
to do with the addresses. Look at this.
We have here the address ID. And now
here my friend, you have two options.
Either you're going to go and build a
new dimension called addresses and then
connected to the dimension customer. And
with that you are actually building
remember the snowflake schema one
dimension connect and branch to another
dimension or we're going to stick with
our goal where we are building the star
schema. So we always try to fit
everything together into one dimension
and only in extreme cases we might go
and branch. So of course I'm going to
stick with the goal. We are building
star schema. That means all the address
informations going to go inside the
dimension customer. And don't worry, we
can always go and split if things goes
wrong. So that means we have now to go
and merge more and more things to the
dimension customer. And I would like to
show you one trick that I usually use in
order to feel safe before merging things
together. Yes, you can go and count
things after merging, but usually I go
to the module layer. So, first save.
Yeah. Okay. Close and apply before going
to the model view. Now, look at this.
This is our new dimension that we are
actually building all the time. And you
can see that PowerBI is always trying to
connect a new table to the whole data
model. Of course, we have to remove all
those stuff and start from a scratch.
But don't worry about it. Now, now the
thing is if I have like a new table that
I would like to merge it to the table
customers, I go and check the cardality.
Like for example, we want to merge the
addresses with the dimension customer.
Right? Now you can see we have already
like a relationship between those two.
Now if I see the cardality is one to one
relationship between those two tables,
then this is really safe to merge those
two tables together because PowerBI
automatically check the values inside
those two tables and detect the
cardality. And of course this is a great
indicator for me to say nothing going to
go wrong if I go and like merge those
two tables together. So this is a good
thing. And by the way about the
cardality if the relationship is one to
many so from the addresses is one and in
the dimension customer is many it is
still safe. So this is another way to
check before let's say merging two
tables together. Let's go back to power
query. So now same thing let's go to the
dimension customer. We're going to go
and merge and here we're going to search
for the addresses. This time the ID
going to be the address ID as well. Here
address ID always left join never inner
join. If you have one missing address
then you are removing a whole customer.
So this is not safe. We always use lift
join and same things. So we're going to
go and expand. We just need the street
and the city name. So look at this.
Looks nice. Now of course we have to go
and test. So do we have 60 customers?
Well yes. So merging the addresses
didn't cause any harm any issues. Now
what else do we have? We have the cities
right? So let's go over here. Now what
do we have here? We have the city name
and the region name. But here we have
equality issue. You can see that the
first row is actually the column names
and not the column one and column two.
Now in order to fix this, this is very
simple. We have here in the ribon use
first row as headers. So probably are
going to go and promote the first header
as the column name for the table. So
this is very simple. Look at this. We
have now the city name and the region
name. Now again what we're going to do
we're going to go and merge this inside
our dimension customer. Again as I told
you you can go and check whether we have
a one relationship at this table. So we
have it over here the cities. Let's go
and grab it. I'm going to go and remove
this relationship and then try to
connect it to the dimension customer.
This of course only for test. So I'm
going to take the city name to the city
name. All right. Look at this one to
many relationship. So at the side of the
cities we have one. So I'm going to get
good feeling about it in order to merge
those two tables together. We don't have
many. This will not duplicate my
customers. So that means we're going to
go back to transform data. So again we
merge. And as you can see I'm merging
all the time and I will keep doing that.
So let's go and connect our cities. So
city name and the city name is somewhere
over here. So let's go and connect left
join. Now what do we need from this
table is actually only the region name.
We have already city name. So we
actually don't need it twice inside our
dimension. And we're going to go and
check we have 60 customers. All right.
Now to the last table. We have the
regions. Well here we have only one
column. We don't have like a lot of
context that's going to help us for the
dimension customer. And the region
information we have it already. So it
makes no sense to merge this table to
the dimension customers. This
information is already in our dimension.
So as you can see we have here the
regions. So actually this makes no sense
to merge inside our dimension customer.
It will not add any value or add any
context. And this is of course one of
the things that happens all the time
inside the data models. You're going to
find the same piece of information
multiple times in multiple tables. So
the region exists here and as well in
the cities and maybe in another table
that we didn't discover yet. So here we
have to be very careful we are not like
repeating the same data over and over
otherwise we are confusing the data
model. So my friends we went through the
six tables and we have now one gigantic
table that holds all the context about
the customers. So that was big step. We
have compiled now six tables into one
dimension customers. But we are not done
yet. We will not go to the second
dimension until we do my favorite step.
We have to do the housekeeping. So we
have to clean up, organize and make sure
that we are following the standards. So
we polish everything in order to make
the dimension is ready to get used in
the data model. So let's do that. All
right. So now the first step that we
have to do is that we have to get rid of
unnecessary informations unnecessary
columns inside the dimension. Remember
the rule each info each data should earn
its place. So that means if there is
something unnecessary we have to remove
it. Otherwise it's going to take space.
It going to lead to bad performance and
as well it going to lead to confusion as
you start building the reports. So that
means my friends now we're going to go
through all the columns inside our new
dimension and think about it should we
leave it or should we drop it. So the
customer ID for sure it's going to stay
the customer name the segments all those
informations are important for filtering
and slicing and building visuals. Now to
the address ID well my friends I believe
we don't need it. I can't imagine that
this going to be necessary for reporting
only for connecting things. And we have
decided to put everything together into
one dimension. We are not making
snowflake that's why I'm going to go and
drop it. So remove the account manager.
Okay the payment terms going to stay.
Now the hash keys well my friends those
stuffs comes from the source system and
I will never imagine that we're going to
need this for reporting. That's why
we're going to go remove. By the way
this takes a lot of space inside the
data model. I remember in one project we
had like for each table one hash key
where the refresh time for the data
model was really horrible. It took a lot
of time and all because those hash keys
they are string values and they are
really big and if you have millions of
rows imagine how much space this takes.
So the fix was very simple to just go
and drop all those hash keys and
suddenly we saved around I think 20% of
the data set. So now let's go and remove
the hash key. Then we have source ID.
This is as well some garbage from the
source system. We would never use this.
Now here we have the primary contacts.
Okay we have their email. Now whether it
is primary well this going to be always
true, right? We use this as a filter. So
that means actually this is like totally
useless information and we would never
use this. So let's go and remove it.
Credit limits going to stay the phone,
the street, the city name and the
region. So not that bad, right? We just
dropped like around four columns. All
right. So this is the first step that
we're going to do in order to clean up
our dimension. Now comes the naming
convention. As you can see, we are not
following the standards. Only the table
name is actually using the camel case.
But all the columns are actually
following another case. This we call it
the Pascal case where we don't have any
separations and the first letter is
capitalized. Now of course since we have
committed to the snake case we have to
go and rename all the columns or you can
say you know what since everything is
like Pascal case I'm going to go and
change the rules but of course you have
to stick to it and we're going to follow
the Pascal case. Well this is something
that you decide but I have decided for
the snake case and I'm going to go and
now rename everything to the standards
but of course I'm going to speed up. So
I'll just do it for the first column for
you. So this going to be the customer ID
and this going to be customer name right
like this. So now see you soon. All
right. So now to the last column. As you
can see here we have the cities dot
region name. We don't need the cities
dot because this is just comes from the
original table the cities. We're just
going to go and call it region. That's
it. So I'm going to say everything is
clean inside our dimensions. The names
are friendly. So the table name, the
column names and as well the values
inside the table. This is really
important. If you see something critical
technical, we have to do something about
it. Now I'm going to say our dimension
customer is ready to use. But now of
course before we close and go to the
second dimension, we have the last last
step where we're going to go and hide
all the original tables so that we don't
see them anymore inside the model. So
we're going to go through them one by
one. The addresses we don't need it
anymore. So we'll deactivate the enable
load. So yes, same thing for the
customer master. So we have to do the
whole thing for all six tables, the
cities. So deactivated the contract as
well here. The regions, well actually we
didn't merge it, but we don't need it.
We have this information already in the
dimension customer. And the last one,
the user details. So right click and
disable. Okay. So with this, we have
consolidated a lot of things into one
dimension. Let's go and close and apply.
Well, look at this. Everything gone and
I have only the dimension customer. Now,
I'm going to go and clean up those
relationships. I don't need them. So,
remove, remove, and last remove. So, now
comes the most satisfying like thing
that I'm going to do. We're going to
zoom out and look at this. Our data
model get reduced a little bit. And now
we have here one good solid dimension.
So, my friends, this is the first
dimension. And I'm going to say this is
the biggest dimension that we have
inside this row data model. We have of
course to keep iterating on this. And
the next big dimension of course in our
business the products. And now again the
same iteration we start by collecting
all the tables that has to do with the
products. We had very big table called
products where we have a lot of context
about it. So I'm going to drag it over
here. And the second table that actually
has to do with the products that was the
subcategories. I don't find it. Well
yeah it's over here. So this one going
to organize the products. And I think by
looking to this actually that's it. So
we have only two tables to do with the
products. We're going to go and try to
merge everything into a new dimension
called dem product. So let's go and do
that. We're going to go again to the
power query. All right. So now our two
tables are again the products and the
subcategories. Now of course we have to
start one of them as the foundations.
It's going to be the products of course
because here we have a lot of context.
This is the master table for our
dimension. So as usual so what we're
going to do same thing. We're going to
go and create a reference out of it.
Drag and drop it to the dimensions. Let
me just make this smaller and we're
going to go and rename it. Same thing.
The prefix is dimension and the name is
product. Okay. So now let's have a quick
look to our dimension products. As you
can see, we have a lot of columns
describing as well. We have a lot of
things that we're going to clean up at
the end. But of course, we have to
understand how many products do we have.
Well, same thing. We have 60 products.
And the last one, we have as well a
dummy data. So it says don't use test
blah blah blah. So that means this is
something from the source. We're going
to go and remove it quickly. So uncheck
it. And other thing that's let's make
sure that we don't have duplicate inside
the products. So we can do a quick group
I group by. So count rows. Okay. Now we
check this. Do we have any twos? Well,
only one. So this is clean. We don't
have any duplicates inside our products.
But now you might notice that we don't
have actually a product ID. We have a
product code. So that means the source
table is not providing like a unique
identifier in order to connect it to the
data model. it is using the code as like
a business key. This is of course a
tricky thing. So now we will not clean
anything yet. Let's go and check the
subcategories. So the subcategories is
over here. Now the first issue with that
we don't have the column name. So what
we're going to do we're going to use the
first row as headers. And the second
issue actually here we are merging two
informations in one column. We have the
category and the subcategory side by
side and they are separated with a pipe.
Now of course we have the subcategories
already in the dimension products. So we
have it over here but what is missing
which is very important is the category.
So that means we need the category in
order to add more context to this
dimension and we have somehow to grab it
from this column. Now of course we
cannot go and merge this directly to the
product because we don't have keys. The
keys are actually like piece of
information inside each value. That's
why we have to go and split this into
two columns. One category and another
one subcategory. So let's go and do
that. So here we have a nice function
called split columns by delimiter. So
here PowerBI get it correctly. We are
splitting by custom and the separator is
the pipe. So actually everything is
ready. Let's go and hit okay. Look at
this. Now we have the categories and the
subcategories. I'm going to go and
rename things because here it says one
and two. PowerBI has no idea about the
content. So this going to be the
category and the other one going to be
the subcategory. Now we are not there
yet because if you look at this you see
that all the subcategories all the
values are lowercased but if you check
our dimension over here you see the key
is not ready yet. We have it
capitalized. So the first letter is
actually an uppercase and this will not
work. So if I go and merge now things
together powerbi will not find any
match. So as you can see we have always
like to prepare the data before merging.
The keys must work otherwise you're
going to get only nulls after merging.
So now either we're going to make this
lowerased or we go over there and we
make the key as a capitalize. I'm going
to change it over here in the reports.
It looks way nicer if you have things
capitalized. So how we going to do it?
We're going to go to transform and here
we have a nice function called
capitalize each word. So let's do it.
Now our key is ready for the merge. So
everything now is simple. We're going to
go to the dimension product. As usual we
merge. We go and pick our table. So it
is the subcategories over here. And now
all we have to do is to just select
things. So subcategory with the
subcategory and left join. So let's go
and set. Okay. All right. We have it
here as a table. We have to expand.
Well, we don't need the subcategory. We
have it already. We just need the
category. So okay, now it is working. As
you can see, we have now the categories
inside our table. All right. So now with
this, I'm going to say that our
dimension now hold all the context about
the products in one table. We don't have
anything else from the other tables. Now
we're going to come back to this topic
where I said we don't have like an ID
from the source system. We just have
like a code and a name. So it's not like
the dimension customer we had here like
an ID. Now here we have like two options
either we're going to leave it as it is
or we're going to go and create a
surrogate key something that we create
inside the model not from the business
and we're going to use this ID in order
to connect it to the facts in the
future. So I'm going to say for now I'm
going to go and add it. So we're going
to go and add column and we just go and
add an index column and we start from
one. So we have it over here. I'm going
to go and rename it. So this going to be
not the product ID. This going to be the
product underscore key. We agreed in the
rules if you are creating any keys from
us. We always have the suffix underscore
key for it. So that I know which ids
come from the source and which one that
I created. So it looks like this and we
have like 60 products. Now I'm going to
say we are done with merging and
creating things. Let's go to the last
step where we start like cleaning up and
bringing standards to this dimension. So
that means again we're going to go
through all the columns one by one and
say whether they going to stay or leave.
So the code of course going to stay the
name, the brand, the subcategory, the
prices, the supplier. We could use it
for slicer. Now comes something that I
saw a lot in data models where people
just leave such information here. So
those are the big text the descriptions.
Now this is of course a huge text. It is
describing each product. And of course,
we have to ask ourselves, do we really
going to go and use such a description
inside our reports? In most cases, no,
we are not building like an operative
system. We are not building an interface
in order to show the descriptions of the
products. We are building analytics and
reports. And in most cases, we don't go
and use product descriptions and long
text in the visuals. But of course in
the other hand I saw a lot of people
that are using PowerBI in order to build
some kind of application let's say to
see all the data. Well there's like some
projects that are misusing PowerBI in
order to build interfaces but not BI
right. So in most cases I refuse to have
such informations inside the data model.
That means we go and drop it. So remove
now same thing we have here hash key the
source ID all those informations came as
garbage let's say from the source system
and we don't need it here. Of course,
there are maybe very important
informations in the source systems, but
here we don't need it. So, let's go and
remove it. Now, here we have our
category and the product ID. Now, before
we start like renaming everything, I
would like to go and sort the columns.
So, I would like to see the product key
at the start as like primary key and the
category. I would like to have it side
by side with the subcategory. Well, I'm
going to say subcategory and then
category. So, that like we have
hierarchy, right? The product then
subcategory and then category. I like to
have things ordered so it makes sense as
you are building visuals and reports.
And now I'm going to say we have all
useful informations and we can go now
and start renaming things again. I'm
going to do it now offline in order not
to waste time. So see you soon.
All right. So this is the last column
and with that we are following now the
same naming convention. Sometimes I
remove few things like for example the
subcategory name. I call it now
subcategory. So there is no need for the
name inside the column name. Now there
is one more thing by looking to the
values you can see that the subcategory
is actually capitalized. Same thing for
the product name only the category is
everything here lowercased and this of
course because it comes from another
table where everything is lowercased. So
now in order to like to bring standards
to the values I'm going to go and apply
the same function. So transform and
capitalize each word. So now things
looks like more harmonized everything
capitalized and maybe we can add it as a
rule inside our project where we say all
the text values inside our data model is
capitalized so that people once they
start building reports they don't have
to go back to the data model and start
like adding more functions and
transformations. All right so now we
have really nice dimension as well. The
last step that we're going to do we will
just go and deactivate the row tables.
So the products we will go and
deactivate it. Yes. Same thing for the
subcategory as well. It is deactivated.
All right. So, we are done. Let's go and
make sure that we save and apply. All
right. Now, this is our new dimension
over here. Let me just zoom in. We're
going to go and remove the
relationships. We don't need them. And
for this as well. So, now look at this.
Now, we have clean two dimensions are
waiting here on the side. And our
original data model is getting cleaned
up step by step.
Okay. So, now what is next? What we
going to do? Do we have like a third
dimension that we're going to go and
build? Of course, there will be a lot of
dimensions, but here we have like
something that we have to decide on.
Now, the products and the customers,
they were like standalone and very
obvious dimensions where we had like a
master table for them. So, we have like
table products and another table called
the customer master. So, that's why it
was really easy to make those dimensions
out of those row tables. But now the
thing is in all other tables that are
remaining in the data model, most of
them are events. So we don't have like a
master table for the third dimension.
Actually most of the dimensions going to
get like extracted out of the event. As
we said before in many facts there are
always like hidden sneaky dimensions
that we extract out of it. This is
exactly now the scenario because of this
now we have like two ways on how to
continue. Either you're going to go
through all the events one by one and
start like extracting all the dimensions
and once you are done once you have all
the dimensions then you start building
the facts or the other way that I prefer
that at the same time we take like one
event table and we split it into fact
and dimensions. So at the same time we
are building the fact and the dimensions
out of the row tables and we don't have
like to redisuss it and brainstorm it
again. So either you go all the way by
extracting all the dimensions and only
after that you build the facts or at the
same time you are building the
dimensions and facts. Well I tend to the
second option. So now let's go and do
that. All right. So now by looking back
to our data model we have actually a lot
of events. So we have the orders and
sales, we have the invoices, the
payments, the campaigns and of course
it's going to be really hard to think of
everything at the same time. That's why
we have to go and pick one event, go
deep inside it and start splitting it
into facts and dimensions. So that means
we have to go and pick an event. I'm
going to say we're going to start with
the orders and sales. This is the most
important one and I think this is a
little bit complicated. So now let's go
and collect all the related tables like
we have done in the dimensions together
in one place. So we have the orders 2026
and as well we have the same table for
the 2025. What else do we have? We have
as well the lines for the orders. So
this one over here, the sales target is
going to be the budget. So I'm going to
say it's not really same event. It is
like the planned budget for each month.
We're going to think about it. Maybe
we're going to consider it. So I'm going
to say this is more than enough. We have
a lot of things. We have the orders and
the lines. And here we have to have full
focus because we start talking about
facts. Facts are very sensitive topic.
So again we're going to go to the Power
Query. Let's go inside. Now the first
thing before we start touching anything,
let's have some understanding more about
our tables. So let's start with those
two orders. So 2025 and 2026. Now again
I'm going to ask the question of the
grain what each row is representing.
Well you can see over here each row is
actually one complete order. So we have
all the informations about the orders.
We have the customer name, city, region
looks like dimension, right? But of
course we have here the events, the
order date, the channel of the order,
the status, priority, total sales for
the order and some big notes. Now let's
go to the other table. The orders 2025.
This is very identical table. Also
actually here we have a split from the
source system. Here as well we have the
same grain. Each row is actually one
order but again the source system is
splitting the data maybe for some
reasons like archive and so on. And of
course we have to do something about it.
We cannot leave it splitted like this.
It just confused the data model. Now
let's go to the third one the order line
items. So now again the same question.
What each row here is representing? Well
I'm going to say each row is actually a
line of order. So one line is not the
whole order like we had it in the other
tables. It is one position about the
order and of course we can go and check
that by aggregating the order ID. So
let's just group by and say okay this is
the count of rows. Well by looking at
this you can see here we have a lot of
duplicates. That means for each order we
might have like multiple lines like here
for the first order we have three lines.
All right. So I will just go and remove
it. We are just testing here. So that
means this has like more details another
grain than the orders. Now my friends
here we have like a very classical
scenario with the order lines and the
orders. This is something that we call
from the transactional systems from the
sources the headers and the details. All
right friends now I can say we come to
the most complicated and confusing part
in the whole data modeling project.
That's why if you don't have cave yet go
and grab one.
Okay. So now we're going to talk about
the header and the details. This is very
tricky and confusing part where a lot of
people make mistakes in the data
modeling for reporting and analytics but
yet one of the best practices and the
common way on how to store transactions
in OLTB sources. So it is a very common
way on how to module the sources and
you're going to find it a lot in many
companies. So my friends, if you
understand this concept and you know how
to deal with it in the data modeling for
business intelligence and analytics,
then my friends, your life going to be
really easy working at companies because
you're going to face this data model
over and over. So now in order to
understand this, let's start with very
simple example. I don't know, look
around you. Maybe you find an order or
an invoice.
>> I found it. If not, go and check online
your stuff. So now here I have an order.
And if I look at this, this is one
business event. I have done an order.
And this business event actually has
like two sections a header and details.
The header it is like the top level
informations in the order. Like for
example I have the address, the
customer, the company, the order number,
the order state, the order dates. So all
those informations we have it like only
once for each order right and those are
my friends the header. Now if you look
below it depends if you ordered multiple
things you're going to find like a table
with more details. Like for example,
you're going to find the list of all
products that you have ordered in this
one order and other things like the
quantity, the price and as well the
final costs. And my friends, this setup,
the header and the details, you're going
to find it in many events in many
companies. So you're going to find it in
orders, in invoices, in shipment, in
delivery. Even in manufacturing, you're
going to have the bill of materials, the
production order, or if you have like
ticketing system, you're going to find
it as well in tickets. all those
transactions and many systems going to
store those informations into header and
details. Now of course the big question
is how we going to deal with those stuff
inside our data model for business
intelligence. Now one of the biggest
mistake that people do is that they look
at the header and details as two
different things. So they say okay the
header looks like a fact. So they go and
make like for example fact orders and
they see okay the details as well looks
as fact but this is like different
grains. That's why they're going to go
and make another fact for that. the fact
order line. So they make out all of this
like two facts. And now of course in
reporting you're going to need those two
tables in one visual in one report. So
that means they need two data from the
facts. And here people come in this trap
where they're going to say okay well
actually we have the order key in the
header and the details. This is actually
what happens in transaction systems.
They link the order with the header
using the key. And they're going to say
okay this is a perfect match. This is
the common column. I'm going to go and
connect those two facts together. Well,
yes, this might work, but this can
introduce only issues in the reporting.
This has first of all, bad performance,
can lead to bad numbers and as well this
is very confusing once you are building
the reports. So, this is one of the
biggest mistakes that people do in data
modeling. And now, of course, the
question is how we going to do it? How
we going to model this? Well, the rule
is always the same. The fact table going
to sit always at the level of things
that you are measuring. So, ask yourself
where the numbers come from. So if you
look to the header and the details
you're going to see that actually all
the numbers are stored in the details.
The header is just like giving us some
context and maybe like maximum one or
two numbers but the core numbers the
core measures are in the details. So
that means it is always better to build
a fact table that comes from the finest
details from the lowest level because my
friend we can always roll up and
aggregate the data pack to the header.
So that means in most cases we're going
to go and create the core fact table
from the details and we're going to the
header in order to get more context for
our new facts. So either we're going to
use it in order to generate a new
dimensions from the header or we're
going to use it as well to connect the
data model to our new fact from the
details. So this is the very common
pattern. We make fact from the details
and we use the help of the headers in
order to generate dimensions and to
connect it to our fact. And I can say
this going to work like 90% of the time.
Sometimes you have some edge cases where
people are storing a lot of numbers in
the headers. But in most cases this is
going to work if you follow this
pattern. Okay. So now with this I have
prepared you with the foundations. Now
let's go to PowerBI and try this out.
All right. So now what we're going to do
with those three tables I'm going to say
let's start with the easy and obvious
thing. We have to go and combine those
two orders into one single table. So
again if you have two tables have the
same grain and as well they are
identical. They have the same shape. we
go and append them. So how we going to
do it? It's going to be very simple.
We're going to go over here and say
append queries and I'm going to go and
create a new one so that we don't lose
let's say the row tables. So now here it
says two tables and the first table. I'm
going to start with the oldest. So first
2025 and then 2026. All right. Let's hit
okay. So now we have a new table over
here. Let's go and rename it. So this
going to be the orders. Now of course
this going to be like an intermediate
table. We don't have like fact and
dimension. We are just like merging
things. Of course, if you want, you can
go and make another order for all the
temporary things, but I'm going to leave
it now in this stage. Now, of course, we
are not done. Let's have a look to the
append whether we have any strange
things here. We have some nulls and if I
go over here, the source file has as
well some nulls. So, actually there is
like something wrong and as well the
legacy reference. So, that means they
are not completely identical. Let's have
a look again. We have here the legacy
reference and in 2026 we don't have it.
So actually with the new orders we don't
have this legacy column. So let's go a
and remove it. It says as well legacy.
So I think we don't need it for
reporting. And let's go and check the
resource file. So over here we have it
in 2025 but we don't have it I think for
2026. So again it is a legacy thing. We
go and remove it from our new table. So
you go out remove. Now here we have a
lot of nulls. The gift message. If I go
over here you can see actually we don't
have any value. This is garbage column.
So it is just taking space. Let's go and
remove it as well. So as you can see, we
are cleaning up. And since we are
talking about cleaning, we have here the
order notes as well those big text. Come
on, we don't need those stuff in
analytics and reporting. So I'm going to
go and remove it as well. So I think now
we have like complete match between
those two tables. We don't have any more
nulls. So they are completely identical.
Of course you might say but we lost an
information which record come from which
table. So the 2025 and 2026. Well,
actually we don't need this information.
We have it already in the order date. So
it will be just like an extra
information that we have already. But if
it was like another information like the
country or something. I would go and add
the source. All right. So now again our
orders is the header information. As you
can see we have here a lot of context
for each order. So very good candidates
for dimensions and the order line items.
Here we have all the numbers. So this is
the detail table for the orders. And
this means my friends this going to be
our core fact table for the topic sales
and orders. So now where we're going to
start either we create the fact table
now or we start extracting the
dimensions from the orders. I'm going to
say let's go to the orders and start
like creating new dimensions. So what do
we have here? We have the customer name
the customer city. Well we don't create
now another dimension called customers.
So we're going to leave it like here.
Same thing for the region. Those cities
going to stay over here. The date as
well. Now here we have something
interesting. We have the order channel
where we have like some numbers. Those
are technical ids. They are not
something that we're going to use in
order to aggregate. We have as well
status and priority. All three
informations are actually good
candidates for dimensions because we can
use them in order like to filter and
slice. Now, of course, the question is
what is the topic? Are they like related
to each others? Could we make like one
dimensions out of this? Well, they are
actually not related to each other. You
can see here the order channel, the
status, the priority. They are just like
confirmations for the order but they are
not like connected together in order to
make like good dimension. And of course
we will not go and make like one
dimensions for each column. This is not
good in this scenario. What we're going
to do my friends, we're going to build
the junk dimension. We're going to put
them all together in one and then
reference it back in the fact table
later. So how we going to build a junk
dimension? We're going to go and make
another reference out of this. So we're
going to say reference and this going to
be a dimension. So I'm going to drag and
drop it to the dimensions. Let me just
minimize this. All right. So right click
on it, rename. Well, I'm not going to
call it again junk. So this going to be
the order flags. Maybe you're going to
have another junk from another events.
That's why we will not make it like a
super generic. Now how we build this?
It's very simple. We're going to go and
remove all the unnecessary stuff and say
okay, remove. We don't need the order
total. This is a number. We don't need
it for dimension. Now the last thing
what we're going to do, we're going to
go and remove all the duplicates from
all three. So select all and say remove
duplicates. Very nice. We have only 14
rows. Now, of course, what is missing?
We need like a key for this dimension.
So, we're going to go and add a column,
an index column that starts from one.
Then we're going to call it so rename
the flag key because this is a surrogate
key. We just created this in our model
and go to the top. Okay. So, this looks
already good. Now, we are not done yet.
There is something that I really don't
like those order channels. So, as you
can see those numbers now, this can
confuse a lot. If you just bring it to
the reporting, people might go and
aggregate or find an average of this.
Those are ID for something that we don't
know and we cannot leave it like this.
We have to make something meaningful of
this. So now at work in order to
understand what those numbers are, we
actually go and read documentations or
ask the people responsible for the
source system. Maybe ask an expert from
the business or from the processes. So
at the end you have to find the mapping
between those numbers and the real
values so that we can show it in the
reports. Now let's say that I got it
from somewhere those informations. Now
the question is how we going to add it
to this data model because those
informations are not coming from the
source. From the source we are getting
only those ids. So that means this is
new information that I'm adding to this
data model and it doesn't exist from the
sources. And how we can do that my
friends we go and add a data inside our
data model by going to the home rippon
and say enter data. So this is going to
be very simple. We are just creating a
table from scratch like an Excel. So the
first column going to be the channel
code and we need another one where we
have the full name. So the channel name.
Okay. So it is just like mapping between
code and the name. So we make sure that
we cover everything from our data. We
have the 10 and this stands for online
store. Then we have 20. This is the
retail partner. Then the 30 this is the
channel of wholesale. And 40 is a filled
sale. So we make sure that we have
covered everything. So we have here
actually only four. Okay. So this is the
translation the mapping between the
cryptical code and the friendly name.
All right. So now let's go and hit okay.
Well now I have it here as a table. So
I'm going to go and rename it channels
and then maybe bring it back to the
stage because this is something like
intermediate, right? So now what we're
going to do, we're going to go back to
our order flags and we have to replace
those numbers with the new values. And
we can do that by merging queries. So
let's go and find our new table
channels. All right. So this is the key
and left join. So let's hit okay. All
right. Okay. So let's go and expand.
Remove the code. We just need the name.
And I'm going to move it over here. Of
course you can now decide whether you're
going to leave the code together with
the name. But I'm going to say actually
the codes are just like confusing. So
I'm going to go and remove it. So now my
friends this is what we call data
enhancement, data enrichment. And this
is very typical things that we do in
data modeling because in source systems
we're going to get a lot of cryptical
things that we cannot just go and
present it in the reports. So we have to
add from our site something new to the
data model and with this comes a really
great responsibility because this is
very typical what could happen that
initially going to go and start mapping
everything manually. So everything looks
perfect but now suddenly the source
systems are generating let's say new ids
new values that we didn't map yet. So a
typical problem happens that initially
we do things correct but afterward we
forget about it or maybe we just go and
switch to another project and your
reports can show only nulls over the
time because we don't have values for
that. So adding data manually from us
the humans to the data model it is
something critical and we have to be
careful for it. So if you go to another
project and you hand this data model to
someone else, make sure to inform them
that they have to check from the source
systems. If there is something new, they
have to go and extend this manual data
that we added to the data model or what
is way better and perfect. If you say,
you know what, this mapping should
happen in the source system and you are
responsible for it and provide it with
all other files. This is of course the
best option because then we don't have
any more the responsibility to touch the
data inside the data model. everything
going to be like fully automated. Okay.
So now back to our junk dimension. The
last step is just to polish. So that
mean we will just rename things the
channel and here we have a status. So
only the S and the priority.
Okay. So our junk dimension is ready to
go. Now let's go back to our orders.
Let's see. Okay. Again we say those
information is going to stay and that
means we just extracted one dimension
out of the order which is totally okay.
Now let's start with our fact. This is
going to be really interesting. Let's go
to the order line. This has the lowest
details. It makes sense. So, let's go
first and make a reference out of it.
This is going to be our first fact
inside the data model. Let me just uh
minimize all those stuff. And then let's
go and give it a name. I'm going to call
it the fact sales. All right. So, this
is the foundations for our fact. We have
enough numbers inside it. But now the
thing is we need the dimensions. So, we
have already here the product name, but
we need the customers. We need the junk
dimension. We need the order date. So we
need all those stuff from the header to
be included as well in our new facts. So
that means now we're going to start like
combining things to our new fact. And
here you have to be very very careful.
If you do one wrong merge, you're going
to destroy the whole facts. So now we
come to the rule that we have to protect
our numbers. So that means any changes
that we do to the fact table, we still
have to see the same numbers. And if we
see something else, we have of course to
fix before merging it to our fact. So
now let's try this out. and I'm going to
show you how I usually do it. Now, of
course, I will not go and start like
scrolling down because usually the event
tables are really big. So, instead I'm
going to go and close and apply. So,
just save it. All right. So, I think
somewhere is our new facts. But we don't
deal now with the data model. Let's go
to the report view. And now we're going
to go and pick like one important
measure from our fact in order to keep
tracking it for each change. So if I go
to the fact sales over here, we have
here some options like for example the
line total, the quantity, the cost, the
price. I'm going to go with the main
measure, this going to be the line
total. So let's drag and drop it to our
card. So my friends, this is the number
and we have to protect this. Anything
that we combine, we add to this fact
table, it always should result exactly
to this same number. If something
change, then we have an issue. So we
have to know this number by heart until
the end of the project. This number
should be correct. Okay. So now we have
the number. Now let's go back to power
query and start adding things. So back
to the fact sales. Now what we're going
to do in order to bring the other
dimensions to our facts, we're going to
go and add the header. So we do that by
doing a merge query. We're going to go
to the orders that we have prepared. It
is over here. And how we going to
combine it? By the order ID. And of
course very important the left outer
join. Okay. Now of course we have to
expand. And here we have a lot of
things. I will not now judge everything.
I'm just going to go and remove the
order ID that we just used because we
have it already. And let's go and add
all the things. We can always remove
later. So now we have everything from
the header, the order. And of course,
now the big question is, do we have any
changes for the numbers? So let's go and
close and apply and wait second until
it's loaded. So keep focusing on the
number. Any changes? Well, nothing
changed. This is perfect. We still have
the total sales. Of course, there are
like different methods on how to test.
Like for example, you can go and build
the relationship between them and see
whether it is one to many. So you can do
like different ways of testing before
merging. This is one of them. So that
was successful. Now let's go back to the
power query. Let's go back to the fact
sales. Okay. So with this we have done
the big merge between the details and
the sales safely. And now we can go to
the next steps. Like for example, we
have to go and build the keys inside the
fact. You know each fact has a lot of
keys in order to connect things to the
dimensions. And our fact is not ready
yet. So now instead of having the
product names, we're going to go and
have the product key. Same thing for the
customer. So let's do that. Let's bring
the ids and the keys and we can start
with the customer. Now what we going to
do, we call it something like lookup. So
that means I'm going to go and merge
this to the dimension only to get the
ids. And again, since we are merging, we
have to be very careful. So we're going
to go and merge a query again, but this
time we are merging with the dimensions.
So we're going to go over here and find
the dimension customer. So now this is
our target to get the customer ID. But
of course we cannot now connect using
ids. We have to do something scary.
We're going to go and use the text the
customer name and this can open the door
for many mistakes. So we have really to
check after that. So customer name
customer name join. This is my friends a
lookup. So let's go and hit okay. Now
what we going to do? How we going to
expand? Of course we will not go and
bring now all the columns from the
dimension. We just want one thing the
customer ID. So this one we need and hit
okay. Okay. So now what I like to do
next is to just bring the ID on the
starts so that we have a real fact
table. So it's going to be somewhere
here. Now of course before we do
anything else we have to go and test. So
I'm going to go and close and apply and
keep my eye on this number.
Well nothing changed. That was a
successful merge between those two
tables and there is no risk about it.
Now let's go and do the same thing for
the products. So let's go back to the
fact sales. Same thing we have here the
product name. We need the product ID or
key. So merge. And now same thing. We're
going to go to that dimension product
over here. We join my friends using the
product name. So it's not the product
code which is really scary. So let's go
and hit okay. And we just need a lookup.
So that means we need the product key.
Perfect. So now let's go as well bring
it to the starts side by side with the
other keys somewhere here. Now before we
touch anything, we have to go and test.
Let's close and apply. Keep our eye on
the numbers. Did the numbers just
changed? Now we have way more total
sales than before. Oh no, that was not
successful merge with the products. We
have something wrong and we have to
protect the original number. So yeah, we
have to do something. So let's go back
to power query and see what is going on.
So let's go back to the fact sales.
Well, what we can do, we can go and
check up actually which order have an
issue. So if you select those two and
say okay, let's go and group by. I
imagine those two should be unique. So
let's go and count the rows for that. So
now we see a lot of ones but we see two
right. So here we have an issue. You can
see those orders are fanning out. So we
are getting like duplicates. And let's
go and check something like for example
the order number 25. And then go and
remove this test. So now what we going
to do? We're going to go and search for
this order. It was the 25. All right.
Look at this. We have the same order.
The product name is identical but they
have different keys which is really bad.
Of course, the rest going to be like
identical. It is getting like fanning
out. So, this product has an issue. The
same product name but different keys.
And this is a typical issue. If we are
joining using like names and text,
things can go quickly wrong. So, that
means we have to go and check the
dimension products. So, it was the
kitchen something, right? So, let's just
search for it. This is the first one.
And look at this. We have duplicates
actually inside the Damian products. So
we have different codes for the same
product and if you scroll to the right
side you can see one of them is actually
have more data than the other. So here
we have like brand and the other row
doesn't have brand. Same thing for the
price and the supplier. Of course this
is a data quality issue that came from
the source system and here we have like
two options. Either we're going to go to
the source system and tell them hey guys
you have like wrong stuff you have the
same product twice. Go and clean up the
data and then everything going to be
fine here. or you're going to go and
manually start removing things. But of
course, this is no guarantee that later
we will not get any like quality issues.
Now, if the source system don't want to
clean the data and they going to leave
it as it is, then either you're going to
go and now like clean things manually or
what is way better, we usually build
like a data warehouse where we build
pipelines and quality gates in order to
detect and fix those issues. But now for
this project, since we don't have like a
lot of products, we're going to go and
manually remove those bad rows. So here
we have to decide which version should
stay and of course it's going to be the
one with more infos. So that means with
the nulls should be dropped out of our
dimension. Now of course we have to
detect how many other like scenarios
like this. So I will just remove this
filter select all. Now how we going to
do it? We're going to go and just group
by the product names. So we're going to
go and say based on the product name go
and count the rows and change the filter
to two. You can see we have the issue
with two products the kitchen and the
audio. So it is not that a big deal what
we're going to do. We're going to go
remove this test. Of course, now the
question is how we going to remove those
two rows. I will not do it like as the
last step inside our dimension. I'm
going to go way back. Maybe at this step
filtering the rows as we removed the one
bad row where the product key is equal
to Z zed. Now of course the question is
where are those stuff? Well, it is the
last two rows. You can see here we don't
have brands for them. We don't have a
unit price. And now I remember we had
like a really nice column for the source
ID. So you can see here we have like a
source ID and row identifier for each
one of them and we can use it in order
to filter the data out. So this is one
bad ID. I'm going to go and copy the
value and then use it in order to filter
the data. So I will check this out. Same
thing for the last row. So I'm going to
go and copy this as well and as well use
it in order to filter the data out. All
right. So as you can see now in our
filter we have three things. We are
filtering the data based on the product
code and based on the source ID. So now
let's go and check again. We have to
group up the data by the product name.
So group by insert and product name. Now
let's check the filter. Yes, we have
only one. So that means my friends, our
product names are actually unique. But
be careful now to just remove the test.
All right. Now we go to the last step to
make sure that everything is working
correctly. Nice. So now let's go and
save and check again our numbers. So
come on. Come on. Yes, we got back our
number with that we protected the number
and the fact and it was successful merge
to the product. So we can now go and
continue. Let's go back to the power
query. So where is our fact table? So
with this now we got the two big
dimensions the product key, the customer
ID. Now what is left is actually the
junk, right? So we have those three
columns and we have to connect the junk
to it. Now I see already that we have an
issue for the lookup. We need all those
three in order to join it with the
dimension. But we just removed the order
channel, right? So if I go now and
merge, it will not work. That means I'm
going to take it back and going to go to
the junk and I'm going to go and bring
the ID back. So I believe this was the
step. So let's go and bring it back.
Yes. So we need those stuff. I'm going
to go and rename it. This is the channel
code. Now let's go back to the fact
sales and let's do the merge with the
junk dimension. So we need it. It is
over here the order flags. Now we're
going to go and mark all those stuff but
not the channel itself because it has no
idea about it. It is something that we
added. Then we're going to go to the
right side and select those three. So
now things should work and in the
correct order by the way. So the order
channel, the status and the priority.
Same thing from the dimension. Left
join. Okay. Now the next step we're
going to go and expand. Since it is only
a lookup, we just need the key. So okay.
Yes, we got the junk flag. Uh let's go
and do it side by side with the others.
And of course the big question, do we
have issues with our number? So I'm
going to go and close and apply. Well,
look at this. It is safe. So our number
is protected. Let's go back. I know we
are jumping between but this is part of
the job. We have to do things like
carefully. All right. So with this now
we got all the keys, all the ids inside
our fact and it is ready to get
connected to the dimensions. And now
we're going to go to the next phase
where I like to go and drop things and
polish the facts in order to follow the
standards and the rules that we have
added at the beginning. So now we're
going to start with the first thing. Do
we really need all those columns inside
our facts? So let's do it step by step.
The line ID, we need the order ID as
well in order to count how many orders
inside the fact. The product name, we
don't need it anymore. We just used it
in order to build the keys. So we're
going to go and remove it. Then we have
the keys. That's of course what you
need. And then we have the numbers. We
need all that stuff in the facts. Now we
come to something that is really
important to understand. Now the thing
is in transactional source systems they
usually store the same informations over
and over in different tables just in
order to optimize the performance of
their UI and applications. And this is
of course a big issue for us because
then we're going to have like the same
information everywhere inside our data
model. And this is going to make a big
confusion on how to build the reports.
So that means my friends you have to
protect the data model by having like
one single point of truth for each info.
So that means if I have the customer
city inside the dimension customer I
don't need it somewhere else. This going
to be the dimension customer is the
single point of truth for the cities of
the customers. So I don't have to leave
it in like another dimension or to leave
it in the facts. So always try to reduce
the noise that we inherited from the
source systems and make a decision where
you going to store what but only once. I
said I was only going to say it once.
>> So that means my friends, we will not
leave the customer city inside our
facts. We have it already inside our
dimension. Look at this. We have here
the city of our customers. So that means
we don't need this extra noise that we
have in the facts. We will just go and
remove it. By the way, this is one of
the things that I have noticed a lot.
People going to say, you know what, we
might need it. So you really have to
take a hard decision and start removing
things that you don't need and keep it
only in one place. Same thing as well
for the region name. It as well belongs
to the customer dimension. So let's go
remove. And now here's something
interesting to what we said. We have
here the ship to city and pill to city.
This is different information than we
had in the dimension customer. This
belongs to the transaction to the order.
So for each order we have the city where
it is shipped to. And here the customers
might change from one order to another
to which city or to which location the
order should be delivered. So the city
here belongs to the transaction to the
event. It is not like master data of the
customer. So that means this has
different meaning than the cities that
we have inside the dimension. It is
something here transactional and could
change from one order to another. So
that's why I will not go and remove
those informations because this belongs
to the event to the transaction. So it's
always really important to understand
the business to understand the domain
how things works. So let's keep going.
The order date of course we need it. Now
we have a lot of things that we don't
need anymore because they were only here
in order to do a lookup. So I'm going to
go and remove those stuff that were
belonging to the junk. And now we come
to something really interesting. The
total sales in the header. So as well we
have to decide because now we have two
things. Look at this. We have the total
sales for the whole order. And here we
have like the sales for each item each
line in the order. Now of course if
everything is clean the sum of the line
of totals should be exactly the same
value that we have here from the header.
So that means the grain between those
two are different. And now here usually
I decide on the following where I say we
go and remove any pre-agregated values
because to be honest I don't trust it.
If I need the total sales for each order
actually I just go and summarize those
values. So I have the data already
available. I don't want to have like
pre-agregated things inside the data
model that's maybe outdated or maybe the
calculation is not anymore correct.
That's why I tend to remove any
pre-agregated things that I inherit from
the source system. Especially if I have
the same information from another
detailed measure. So that's why the
order total that we got from the header,
it is something unnecessary and I'm
going to go and remove it. I can always
get it back if it's needed. All right,
my friends. So with this we have removed
a lot of things from our fact table and
now things looks really good. Now I
would like always to order my fact like
this. We have always at the start all
the IDs and then all the dates and at
the end all the measures all the
numbers. It is not something that's very
important but I like to order it like
this. So that's why I'm going to go and
grab all the context to the starts and
just leave the numbers at the end. So
now look at this. We have ids
everywhere. Then we have the cities. We
have to do something about it. After
that we have the dates. We have only one
and at the end we have the bundle of all
measures and numbers that we have in the
fact. So we are almost there but to be
honest I'm still not happy about those
two. So we have the ship to city and the
pill to city. Now of course I can leave
those informations like this but we
could build a dimension for it. So
that's we have like ids instead of text
here which can reduce of course the size
of the fact table and at the same time
maybe I need more context to those
cities like for example the region or
the country and so on. So it's always
better to convert those contextes to
dimensions. So that means we have
actually to construct a new dimension
called dimension geo or locations or
whatever you want to call it. Now of
course the question is what is the
source for this new dimension? Should we
get it from the fact or do we have like
some row tables that can help us with
that? Well, remember we had really nice
row table called cities. This is
perfect. This is already like waiting
for us to build a dimension for it. We
just skipped it. As you can see, we
cannot like think of everything at the
start. As we progress in the data model,
we're going to understand, okay, we need
more things and we always can go back to
the row data and make new dimensions.
So, how we're going to do it? This going
to be very simple. We're going to go and
create a reference and we're going to
drag this reference to the dimensions.
We're going to go and give it a name dem
go. Now we have to make sure that this
has no duplicates. I'm not really sure
whether it has or not. So I'm going to
go and remove duplicates. Well, nothing
changed, but I'm going to leave it as
step. Maybe things changed. Of course,
what is missing this dimension? We need
an ID, right? So we're going to go and
add a new index that starts from one and
bring it to the top. So let's go and
rename it. This going to be geo key,
surrogate key. And the last thing that
I'm going to do just rename things. So
this is the city and this is the region.
Perfect. Now we have new dimension. Of
course, what is the next step? We're
going to go and connect it to our fact
sales. So over here using the city name.
But my friends, we're going to go and
connect it twice because here we have
like two cities, right? They are
different. The city for the shipment and
another one for the pill. So let's go
and do that. We're going to do it
quickly. We're going to go and merge and
then grab our new dimension. It's going
to be of course the city. So and then
hit okay. Expand. We need only the key.
All right. And then we're going to merge
again for the other column. So same
dimension. We need the city, but this
time for the pill. All right. Expand as
well. We need the key. Now, before we
forget, we're going to go and rename
things. So we're going to call it sheep
to city key. And the other one bill to
city key. All right. So now let's go and
grab them to the other keys. So we can
put it over here. And now we're going to
go and remove those two cities. We have
ids. So remove. Perfect. Now let's have
a final look. Look at this. We just have
numbers. Now the last step that I'm
going to do is that I'm going to go and
just rename all the columns to follow
our standards. The snake case. All
right. So now I just went through all
the columns and everything is renamed.
Look at this. Everything looks perfect.
We have only numbers and date. And this
is exactly how the fact table supposed
to be. If you get it, my friend like
this then congrats. We just built a
perfect core fact table for our data
model out of this complicated setup, the
header and the details. Now I'm going to
say the fact is ready. And now we're
going to go to the satisfying part where
we're going to go and deactivate some
row tables and then we're going to go
ahead and connect the dimensions to our
fact. Let's go and do that. I'm just go
and deactivate now the orders both of
them and as well the order line and then
close and apply. All right. So now what
we're going to do, let's go and make
like two words on the left side. It's
going to be this chaos. But on the right
side, we're going to have our new clean
data model, the star schema. So this is
our fact. And now let's go and bring our
dimensions. So product, the geo,
customers, and the junk dimension. So
let's form the star and make sure we
don't have any garbage like in our
model. So now let's go and zoom in. We
still have to do it carefully how we
connect the dimensions to the fact, but
the pattern it's always the same. So
we're going to grab the customer ID and
put it on the fact here. It's very
important that you see one to many
relationship and the filter is single.
So never both. Okay. So that's it. Let's
save. This looks good. One to many and
the arrow going to the fact. Same thing
for the product key. So drag and drop.
One to many single. Save. And for the
junk. So we need flag key is over here.
One to many single. And now comes
something of course really interesting.
We have only one dimension. But we have
to connect it twice to our fact table.
one for the billing and another one for
the shipment. Well, we're going to do
that. So, the geo key goes to the
shipment. One to many single. This going
to be the active one and the second one
going to be the billing. So, drag and
drop one to many and single. So, save.
So, with us, my friend, our dimension go
is actually a role-playing dimension. We
have two relationships to the fact
table. One is active that's going to be
used all the time and another one is
inactive. That's we have to use ducks in
order to use this relationship of
course. But now you might say okay this
is like way too more complicated than
before. If we had like both of them
inside a fact table I can just go and
use them inside my report. Well this is
a fair point. If you never need like
more geo informations but if you start
like needing the regions the countries
and this geo is like getting bigger and
bigger then it makes no sense to leave
it inside the fact and as well it makes
no sense to go and duplicate the
dimension twice. Those are all bad
designs. So now my friends, look at
this. If I zoom out, you can see clearly
the two words. On the left side we have
the full chaos and on the right side we
start having the shape of our star
schema our goal and things looks way
more better than before. So this exactly
my friends how we migrate from bad data
model to a new better model that's going
to deliver only correct numbers, good
performance and as well reduce any
confusion. Okay. Okay. So now we have to
keep going but this time I'm going to go
and pick something that is little bit
easy so that we have break. I will not
pick something complicated. We're going
to go this time with the inventories.
This is an easy one. So let's go and do
something about it. We're going to go
and enter the power query. So what do we
have here the inventories? Oh yes we
have here the product names and for each
month we have the total amount of items
that is planned. Well of course the
first question is is it a fact or
dimension? Well, since we have numbers,
we have dates, this is going to be a
fact. So, before we do anything, we're
going to go and make a reference, then
move it to our facts. This is our second
fact. I'm going to go and call it fact
inventory. And now we can start
preparing the fact. Now, the first easy
issue with that, the first column is not
promoted as a header. So, the column
names are weird. That's why we're going
to go and say use first row as header.
Easy win. Now, by looking to this, you
can see it is really nice table for us
for humans to read. But this is very bad
for data moduling because the date
information is stored as a column name.
We cannot use this of course in
reporting. That's why we have to convert
this from human ready to data module and
reporting. And how we can do that using
unpivot by turning the columns into
rows. It is very simple what we can do.
We can go to transform then select all
the columns. And here we have this nice
function unpivot. Look at this. Like
magic. Now all the column names are
values inside my table. And this looks
already like a fact table. And now after
that I think this is the data type text
right. So we can see here text we have
to go and convert this to a real date.
Then it's going to be easier to use in
the reporting. And same thing that we
have done before we have to go and get
the product key. So we need a lookup.
And how we going to do it? As usual we
go and merge with the dimension. So
dimension product connect the names and
say okay. Now after that we're going to
go and get only the key bring it to the
start and remove the product name. We
don't need it anymore. So remove and of
course my friends you have to go and
check things. Now I'm doing things
quickly but still we have to go to the
report make a card go and calculate all
the values after merging. Are we getting
like any duplicates? But now in order to
make things quicker I will not do that
but you have to do it at your side. I
would never trust that everything is
okay now. So now the last step in our
new fact I'm going to go and rename
things. So this is the product key and
this going to be I'm going to call it
for now month and instead of value I'm
going to call it units. All right
friends. So actually that's it. With
this we got our second fact and it is
perfect. It has an ID. It has a date and
as well a measure. Now before we go and
start connecting things I'm just going
to go and like deactivate so the
inventory will not be loaded. And
actually we have here few things that we
didn't deactivate before. So we have
here the orders and as well the
channels. So you we don't need you.
Okay. Okay, so now let's close and
apply. You can see the chaos is getting
reduced by the time. And here we got our
new fact table. Let me just zoom in and
have a look. Probably I done it
correctly. I wanted to do that. But as
you can see, we never connect the fact
tables together. So there's no direct
lines using the product key. We connect
the fact tables always using the shared
dimension. And this can be the dimension
products. Of course, a quick look. It is
one to many relationship. And the
direction is correct. As you can see, if
you do things correctly, PowerBI going
to love it and it's going to build it
for you correctly. So my friends, look
at this. We are moving from star schema
and now we are like building the galaxy,
right? Which is of course still star
schema. So my friends, that was a quick
win. All right, friends. So that was the
inventory. It was a little break. Now
let's go back to something more
advanced. Now we have to go and pick
something from our data model. So we
have invoices and stuff. I'm going to
say let's go and solve the campaign. So
we have the campaign log and another one
the campaign is cues. So it's time to
solve this puzzle. As usual, we're going
to go inside Power Query. So let's go
and do that. Okay. So let's go to the
campaign log. So again, what do you have
here? The campaign name, the channel,
the start date, and the end date of the
campaign, the budget date, and some nice
numbers. So clearly this looks like a
nice fact table. But still inside it, we
have some context about this fact. So
the context is my friend, the campaign
itself. So it looks like a clear split
between one dimension and one fact,
right? And let's have a quick look to
the other one. The campaign is cues. We
have here the campaign name and the
product names as a list. So this sounds
like the connection to the rest of our
star schema, the products, the product
code. So I think I got the full big
picture. Now let's go and start building
the dimension, the new one. All right.
So as usual, we're going to go and
create a reference out of the row table.
Now we're going to start with the
dimension. So that's why we're going to
bring it to the dimension folder and
rename it. So this is going to be the
dimension campaign. All right. So now
which columns going to stay and which
going to leave? Well my friends we have
here clear split. So all those columns
are actually transactional columns that
belongs to the fact and the rest going
to be the dimension. So let's get rid of
those. Now of course as usual we're
going to go and remove all the
duplicates from those columns. So remove
with this we got our six campaign that
we have inside our data model. And now
by looking to this you might say but
wait a second what is going on here
actually the fact always contains like
dates and numbers and this dimension
looks like a fact. So why we are calling
this a dimension campaign? Well totally
fair point at the start I was as well
confused about this topic but my friend
the dimensions and facts are not defined
by the data type of the columns. Think
about it a dimension is just a context a
description for an event and a fact
table it is the event itself. It is
transaction. It is something that keep
happening every day. So something that
grows fast. Right? So now by looking to
this my friends, this is not
transactional. This is not an event.
Yes, it has a start date and end date.
But this is actually describing the
campaign. It is more context, more info
for the campaign itself. And the number
budget over here, it is a fixed value
that as well describe how big is our
budget for this campaign. So yes, it
looks like an event, but this is not
transactional. Those are just describing
the campaign. Now in order to understand
what is a real transaction, just go back
to the original table. Look at this what
each row here is representing. So for
the first row for example, we have the
campaign name, the channel, the start
and ends, the budget. But here we have a
real transaction with the dates. So we
can see every day what is happening. So
in the first day what happens? We spent
so much, we got so much clicks and
impressions. What happens in the next
day for the same campaign? We spent less
but we got more clicks and so on. So my
friends all those columns are actually
transactional columns. Every day we are
like getting something new about the
campaign. And if you go to the left side
you're going to see those informations
are really static. So the budget will
not change the start and end will not
change as well. And because my friends
those informations are describing the
event itself. So the left side is not
changing so much. That's why it is a
dimension. But on the right side there
is a lot of transactions and movement
and that's why my friends those four
columns are effects. I hope this makes
sense but this is how we define
dimension and effect not only based on
the data types but as well what is going
on how the transaction is happening and
by understanding the business itself. So
that's why I decided on the split based
actually on the data. Now let's go back
to our dimension. We are not done yet.
Of course what is missing? We need an
ID. So start from one, move it to the
left side. And actually that's it. The
last thing that we have to do is to just
go and rename things. So I will just do
it quickly.
This is the key. This is the name.
This is the channel start date.
All right. So I can say our dimension is
ready. Now let's go and create our fact
table. So same thing we're going to go
and create a reference. As you can see
now our work is repetitive, right? This
is exactly how things works. So this
going to be the fact campaign but I'm
going to call it spend since we have the
spending there. All right. So now what
we're going to do actually we don't need
all those affirmations. We have them
already in the dimension. That means we
need now to do a lookup in order to get
the campaign key. So as usual we go and
merge queries with our new dimension the
campaign. We join with the campaign
name. It is unique in our dimension. And
then say okay. Now, since this is a
lookup, we just need the key. We don't
need all other informations. Drag it to
the start because we have always the
keys at the start. And get rid of all
those things. Those are in our
dimension. So, now what is left? We have
the date, impression, click spent. Looks
nice. The last step, we're going to go
and just rename things. So, I'm going to
do it quickly. Campaign key. And I'm
going to make everything lowered.
All right, my friends. So with this now
we got our third fact inside our data
model. Now let's go to the last table we
have here still the campaign skues. Now
before we start working on this we're
going to go and create a reference out
of it. So reference now I'm going to go
and put it in the facts but I'm going to
explain myself later. Okay just stay
with me. Now the first issue with that
we have here we don't have a column
names. So that's why I'm going to go and
promote it as a header. Now what do you
have here? We have like a list of
product codes. Uh this is of course a
nice thing but I cannot use it in
reporting right I cannot go and connect
it now to our model. So that's why we
have to do something about it and we
call moving a list into rows and
explode. So we have to explode it into
multiple rows and we can do that easily
by going to the column and say split
columns by delimiter because we have
here a comma. Let me just move it a
little bit. So the delimiter is actually
a comma. Now the thing is I will not go
and split by columns. I don't want each
value to go in separate columns. This
makes no sense. This time we are
splitting by row. So if you go to the
advanced settings, you can see here we
split by columns or rows. I'm going to
go with the rows. All right. So actually
that's it. Let's go and hit okay. Look
at this. Now each product code is now a
new row. But now before we celebrate
this, we have equality issue. If you see
like some values are shifted little bit
to the right side. You can understand
this if you go back to the original
steps at the start. You can see the
values are yes splitted by comma but
there's like after that a space. This is
just like a cosmetic thing for us in
order to read the list easier. But of
course, this is causing an issue after
we explode. So you see the first value
has no space, but all other values are
like moving to the right side because of
the white space at the start. So how to
solve this? It is very simple. We're
going to right click on it and then go
to transform and here we have the nice
trim. Look at this. Everything moved to
the left side and we don't have any more
empty space because my friends, we have
always to take care of the values that
are used for the merge later. All right.
So now what we going to do with this, my
friends? Well, this is not like a
dimension because it is like two
different entities, right? The campaign
and the products. And as well, you can
see it in our dimensions. We have a
dimension for the product. We have
dimension for the campaign. And this is
like just mapping between them. So, I
cannot go and put it in the dimension
product or in the dimension campaign.
And of course, it makes no sense to
create like a third dimension called
campaign product mapping because this is
not one entity. So, now in order to
understand more what is this, let's go
and convert those values to keys. as we
have done like in the facts. So now
instead of the campaign name, I'm going
to go and make a lookup and grab it from
the dimension. So campaign and we
connect by the campaign name. All right.
Now let's go and grab the key. We're
going to do the same thing as well for
the products. So let's go and merge
dimension product. This time we are
connecting using the product code, not
the product name. All right. Now let's
go and get the key, put them side by
side and get rid of those two
informations. So remove columns. Now the
last thing I'm just going to go and
replace the names. So this is the
campaign name and the other one is the
product key. Now look at this my
friends. If you have table that contains
a lot of keys and you have the feeling
this is like mapping or a bridge between
multiple dimensions. This table has no
numbers just like collection of keys.
Then my friend welcome to a new type of
facts. We call it the factless fact. A
factless fact it is like a classical
fact table. It has a lot of ids in order
to connect multiple dimensions. It has
as well dates. But the only difference
is that it doesn't contain any numbers.
So no measures. So that means with the
factless facts, we are not measuring
anything. So we are not interested about
the how much. We are only tracking
whether something happened or not. So it
is very simple. If your fact has no
measures, no numbers, then this is a
factless fact. So in this example, it is
little bit weird. Okay? It is not that
like perfect fact that we usually have.
We don't have a date only the keys. And
as well we cannot turn this into
dimension because this is not describing
actually anything. If this keeps like
really weird inside your data model, you
can go and just get rid of it. But for
now, we just build it. That's why I'm
going to go and call it the fact
promotion coverage. Okay. So this is our
weird fact. But of course, we have way
better fact here that you can do a lot
of analyzes using it. And we have our
new dimension. So now next what we're
going to do with that we're going to go
and deactivate things. We don't need
them anymore. So disable load. Yes. Same
thing for the campaign is cues.
All right. So now let's go and close and
apply. All right. So now we have here
less things on the chaos word. We are
moving to the right side. And here we
have our new stuff. So this is our
factless facts. Let me zoom in. This is
our new facts. The campaign spend. It is
connected correctly to the dimension
campaign. So one to many relationship
and the arrow is correct and the
dimension campaign it is a shared
dimension to the factless facts which is
just playing the role as a bridge
between the product and the campaign.
Look at this things are getting
connected. Yeah slowly. So I will just
move things a little bit closer. So now
by looking at this you can see our
shared dimension the product is shared
now by three facts. So it is a really
very important one of course and this is
of course a typical thing because in
each business the products are the most
important things. So we are
transitioning right? All right. Now my
friends, we come as well to a point
where it's going to get a little bit
heavy. But I'm going to explain it step
by step. So that means if you are
watching and you didn't take break, go
take fresh air, make a cafe and then we
continue. This is going to be a little
bit tricky, but we're going to see.
Okay, let's go. So now as I said, we
have now some events that we're going to
tackle in one go. Of course, as usual,
we're going to go back to the Power
Query in order to understand the content
and reshape things later. So now what
else that we have inside our table? We
have the invoices. So you can see we
have an invoice ID, an order ID, the
customer name, invoice date, amount. So
this is as well transactional. This is
an event. Now if you go to the payments,
you're going to have the same feeling.
We have the payment ID, the invoice ID,
customer payment day, and the amount.
Now if you go to the shipments, again,
very close shipment ID, order ID, and so
on. So my friends, all of those things
are events and somehow they are all
connected together. Now in order to
understand how to deal with this, we
have first to understand the process. So
the process is very simple like any
order. We have a customer which is the
company. They go and place an order. So
this is the first step. After that we're
going to go and ship the products to the
customer. So this is the second step.
And of course it going to follow up with
a delivery. So this going to be the
third step. So we're going to deliver.
And after that we're going to issue an
invoice. So this is number four. And the
last step my friends the payment is
going to happen. So pay this is step
number five. So actually this is the
whole process of ordering something from
our business. Now of course each step in
our process is actually a transaction.
So it has like a date. It has a number.
So how much the total sales for this
order. Same thing for the shipment. The
delivery had as well date invoice and as
well we have like some numbers on top of
it and how much the customer did pay. So
each one of them has their own table and
transactions. But everything is actually
my friends are connected back to the
order. This is the main trigger for the
whole event. Now of course what are our
options in order to build this process
inside our data model? Either we're
going to go like the source system where
we're going to go and build a table for
each step. So that means we're going to
go and build like one fact table for
each step. With that we're going to get
like five fact tables. We have already
one for the orders but for the rest we
have to go and build them. Well, this
sounds smart and reasonable things to
do. But now, if you have like a deeper
look to each of those steps, you're
going to find that we are talking about
the same money over and over. So, the
same number should be in the orders and
as well in the invoice and I hope in the
payments. Now, of course, the big
question is, do the business users
really want all those numbers in our
reports? Are there many use cases for
all those numbers? Well, I'm going to
say no. Usually the business user is
going to ask us okay find me the total
number of sales for the whole business
or maybe by the region or by the
products and for this my friends we have
one single point of truth for that it
going to be the orders so I'm going to
go and grab the number the money from
the order so I would not go and start
like showing all the numbers from each
steps because at the end it is the same
money so that means we will not get like
a lot of use cases for those numbers
that we're going to have inside those
facts but actually by looking to this
we're going to get better questions from
the business. They're going to ask
questions about the whole process
itself. So they're going to start asking
questions actually not about the numbers
but about the dates. So those
informations are way more interesting
than the numbers like for example how
long it takes from an order to delivery
or how long it takes from an order to
the payment. So there will be a lot of
questions how long from the delivery to
invoice or invoice payment. So that
means usually the business and
especially the process expert they going
to ask a lot of questions about the
dates. So that means what is actually
interesting from all those tables are
actually the dates for the business
intelligence. And now what we could do
instead of having like a fact for each
step, we're going to go and make like
one fact table that's going to put side
by side all those dates inside this fact
table. And once we have everything in
one fact table, then we can answer many
questions about the process. And of
course I'm not inventing here something
in business intelligence in data
moduling. This has a famous name. This
is my friend a type of fact table called
accumulating snapshot. So each row going
to represent like one event one order
that going to hold all the milestone
dates of the steps in our process. So
this is the accumulating snapshot fact
that we're going to go now and build.
Okay. So now since we have now special
type of fact, it's going to be as well
special how to build it. It will not be
like the others. Now since we're going
to have like the whole process in one
row, a lot of tables going to be
involved in building this fact. So this
going to be something special. Now how
to build it? We usually start with the
spine and usually it is the first step
in the process. It is the order. So that
means my friends this orders that we
build at the start where we combine
things together. This going to be the
starting point for our new facts. That
means I'm going to go and create a
reference out of it. Then we're going to
go and drop it in the facts. So we can
go and call it for example fact order
process or fulfillment whatever. All
right. So with this we have now good
starting point. This is the spine of our
fact. Each row is one order. And now the
question is which columns going to stay
and which going to leave. Now again what
is our purpose? We want to show for each
order for each customer all the steps
dates for the whole process. So that
means I don't actually need a lot of
things over here. I just need the order
dates. So that means I'm going to go and
remove all those stuff. Same thing for
the junks over here. So let's just and
go and remove. Actually that's all what
I need. So order ID, customer name, and
order date. This is the first step in
the process. Now of course instead of
having the customer name in order to
connect it to our data model, we're
going to go and make a lookup. So we're
going to go and join it with the
dimension customer. Customer name.
Customer name. And then we're going to
go and get our key.
Perfect. go to the left side and remove
the customer name. Perfect. Now we have
the first step. Now we have to go and
get the other steps of our process. What
is the next one? We have the shipments.
So we have the shipment ID, the order
ID, the mode, the date and the delivery
date. So actually we have here two dates
of the process which is exactly what do
we need. Now about the mode, we can
include it or not. But for now I will
not include those stuff inside our fact.
So I'm going to go back to that order
process and then merge the shipment with
our table. So it is somewhere over here
shipments. We join by the order ID and
hit okay. Now we have to go and expand.
We don't need the ids. We have it
already. We don't need the mode. I just
need the dates. Perfect. Look at this.
We have the shipment date and the
delivery. Now what is the next step? We
need actually the invoice. So let's have
a look to the invoices. So the invoice
ID again the order ID. This is our key.
We have again the customer name. We
don't need it. We have it already. We
just need the invoice dates. The amount
is going to be like the total sales. So
I'm just collecting the dates. Let's go
back to our process and same thing.
We're going to go and merge invoices.
Order ID. Order ID. Okay. Then we have
to expand. So just give me the date. So
now we are getting closer. Now the last
step in our process going to be the
payment, right? So over here, well, we
don't have the order ID. We have an
invoice ID. So we're going to join using
the invoice ID. We have it. We don't
need the customer name, just give me the
date. So let's go back to the process.
Now, of course, I need the invoice ID.
That's why I'm going to go some steps
back in order to expand correctly. So I
need the invoice and as well the dates
otherwise I cannot join it. So actually
now we have the ID and now we can do the
merge. So we need the payments over
here. This time the invoice ID with the
invoice ID. Let's hit okay. Then the
last expansion we need the payment date.
Now I can go and get rid of the invoice
ID. I don't need it anymore. So remove.
So now do we have everything for our
process? We have the order, the
shipment, delivery, invoice, and
payment. And this looks exactly like our
business process. So this is my friends
the fact that called accumulating
snapshots for one event. You're going to
get all the dates of the process. Of
course, I'm doing things very quickly. I
usually do and test a lot. Each merge I
check whether we have duplicates or the
numbers are correct. But now in order to
make things a little bit quicker, I'm
just merging like crazy. So this looks
really good. Now what we're going to do
actually with the other tables, I'm
going to say we're going to go and
deactivate them because we have now the
most important aspect of all those
tables. And of course if in the future
we got like more specific things and
more specific questions about for
example the invoices, then we might go
activate it again and build like special
purpose fact for it. But actually we got
the best of this table. So we connected
is with the order we have already the
customers the invoice dates and the
amount is not that important we have it
in the fact sales. So that's why my
friends I'm going to go and deactivate
it from the model. Same things for the
others. So let's go to the payments. The
same money is just repeating over and
over. So deactivate. Same thing for the
shipment over here. Well we can go and
include the mode if it's really that
important. But again if we get like some
specific use case for the shipment we
can go and activate it and add this
column. This will not be now necessary
for our data model. So we are
deactivating a lot of things. Now by
looking to this we still have the
invoice lines. This is exactly the same
setup like we had at the start. The
invoice line is the details of the
invoice and the invoices is the header.
Again if there is like special needs,
special use case in order to analyze the
invoices. We can go and always build a
fact tables out of those stuff. But for
now I don't see it as a core thing
inside our data model because again the
same money is repeating. So I'm going to
go and deactivate this as well. All
right. Now we have deactivated almost
like everything. So let's go and save
and see what do we have and look to our
data model. So this should get really
empty.
Oh wow. Look, we still have like four
tables out of the chaos. And of course
everything went to the new data model.
Now of course you might think now I'm
trying to rush up the project in order
to close things. But to be honest, this
is exactly the way how I work. I don't
go and push everything inside the data
model in order to have everything just
in case someone ask for something. I try
to push really hard on the data model
only to leave what is necessary. And I
can tell you after working in many
projects, this exactly the process. I
understand the business and try to bring
the core facts and the core dimensions
to the data model. And if there is like
one or two customers are asking very
specific questions about like some weird
tables, I would not go and destroy the
data model to be honest. I'm going to go
and build another PowerBI model just for
their purposes. So it's going to be
something quick just to make their
analysis and that's it and try to
protect the core data model from those
edge use cases. So this is my style on
how I do data modeling. But there are a
lot of people that go and include
everything inside the data model just in
case. Well, if you do it like this, then
you are including a lot of things that
will never be used in reporting and this
is really waste of space performance and
as well confused a lot in reporting. All
right, so now back to our data model.
Now we have like a new things. So we
have to be as well careful that the new
core data model is not getting like full
of chaos. So we have the order process.
This is the accumulating snapshot type
and yes it is connected with the
customers and that's it. So yes, we are
getting a lot of facts but we are making
sure none of the facts are connecting to
each others. They always go through a
shared dimension. Our shared dimension
now is the customers and the products
and always the relationships are
healthy. So we have here one to many
relationship and the direction is from
the dimension to the facts. So this is
not chaotic. This is very healthy. Okay.
So now we are getting very close to end
the migration. Look at this sneaky table
at the ends. Let's go ahead and put it
here. So what do we have here? We have
five tables yet to go. Now let's go to
power query and start like investigating
those stuff. Now I'm going to start with
the very obvious one. Remember the sheet
one. It is a complete duplicate of the
shipment. So they are like identical
tables. Think this is an import problem
that happens maybe from the source
system or in the Excel. Of course
happens a lot in real projects where you
import stuff that are actually not
necessary inside the model. So what you
going to do? We're going to go and just
delete it. Not enable. So we remove it
completely physically from our model. It
is not something that we're going to
need later. Okay, so let's keep going.
We have the exchange rate. Well, I'm
thinking about this. We don't have like
any relevance for this inside our data
model. It is something transactional
maybe important for the interfaces in
the source system. But for reporting,
why do we need those informations? And
actually, I cannot go and connect it to
our data model. That's why I'm going to
say this is a standalone table that
actually will not help us at all. So,
I'm going to go actually and deactivate
it. I will not like physically remove
it. Maybe there is like use case for it.
We cannot connect this anywhere. So
deactivate. Now what else we have here?
The sales target. So here we have the
target revenue and the period. So
someone is like actually planning the
target for each month. Well, this is
like mini transactional table. This is
not a dimension. That's why I'm going to
say let's go and make small fact out of
this. It will not hurt. So we're going
to go and bring it to the facts. Rename
it of course. So rename fact. I'm going
to stay call it the sales targets. And
what else we could do? We just go and
maybe rename things to follow our
standards. So the date and the target
revenue. So actually that's it. It is a
mini one that don't have really any like
IDs to customers or dimensions. Only has
a date and a measure. So that's it.
Let's go and deactivate this one.
Disable load. Now what else do we have?
We have the security. And as well we
have a dimension order. This is of
course completely garbage table. So here
we have just like a list of all orders
and this makes no sense. We have already
better tables for this. So I'm going to
say I'm going to go and remove this
completely physically from our data
model. So delete we will not deactivate.
Perfect. Now the last thing that is left
is the security. Of course my friends we
cannot leave the data model as it is. We
have to make it secure following the
standards. And here we have a very
helpful table to let us know which user
is allowed to see which region. But of
course we're going to do this in the
last phase. So now what I'm going to say
actually we have covered everything. So
let's go and close and apply and have a
look. Yes, it is empty. I know we have
the security. We can do this later. I'm
going to bring it near to our data model
here. And my friends, I can say the
nightmare data set just got cleaned up.
So, we have here a healthy star schema.
Just enjoy this view. Have a look to
this. We have a healthy data model. I
think my camera gave up. So, back now.
Look at this my friends. We don't have
anything anymore from the old spider
web, the nightmare data set. Everything
is migrated to a clean star schema of
course a galaxy one. So everything is
connected using the best practices and
we have here only one fact table that
stands alone and the security table. So
just sit back and look at this. This is
really satisfying. But of course we are
not done yet. We still have the [music]
last phase.
All right friends. Now the next phase
it's all about polishing the data model.
So we're going to finalize our data
model. We're going to make it
trustworthy before handing it over for
the next phases. So, we're going to do
things like for example, we're going to
go and check again our standards, our
rules and check whether all the tables
and the columns are following it like
the snake case, like the prefixes,
suffixes, the keys and so on. The second
step that I usually do is that I go and
create the dimension date. It is a
special dimension that actually going to
be needed almost in all our facts. So,
we have to create it and connect it in
the data model. This is one of the
things that I do at and after that we're
going to build like a collection of
measures. So we're going to make like
set of very obvious measures that's
going to be needed on top of this model.
And after that we're going to make sure
that our data model is secure. That
means we're going to apply on this model
the role level security is like almost
standards in any project. And after that
we do the final testing. So we go to the
report level and we go and check only
the big numbers and whether the
dimensions are working correctly to make
sure that everything is correct before
handing over this data model for the
others. Usually the last step is I go
and make a meeting and talk to the
others, show them the start schema and
make a guide on how to use it for
reporting. All right, my friends. Now
let's deep dive in this phase.
>> Okay, let's do it.
>> Okay, so now let's start with the first
step where we're going to go and check
whether our data model is following the
standards and rules. I'm pretty sure
that I have forgotten something during
the building phase. We are at end human
and we might forget things. So now how I
usually do it is that I go to the table
view over here and have a quick check on
the right side. So I can see that
everything is sorted correctly using the
prefix. So we have the dimensions and
the facts and the last one is the
security. So by looking to this I can
say all the names of our tables are
following the standards. Then we go just
quickly through all the tables one by
one just to have a quick look. Well
everything looks so far fine. Well,
seems that I have followed all the
rules. Well, not everywhere. [laughter]
So, I have to fix here the naming
conventions for this fact table. So, we
have to do it quickly to go to the power
query. Okay. The fact order. So,
customer ID, order dates,
ship date.
Okay, looks good. So, I'm going to go
and close and apply. All right, so we
are following the standards over here.
Let's go and keep going. Looks good as
well. Good. The security going to be at
the end. Okay. So that means we are
following all the rules for the table
names and as well for the columns. Now
there is another thing that I do that I
go and check the date format. Well, you
can see here that in our dates we are
using the full name, the full month.
This looks really weird in reporting. If
you have a lot of dates, it's going to
take a lot of space in the report level.
So what I usually do is that I decide on
one like smaller format and I stick to
it for the whole data model. So now what
I'm going to do, I'm going to go and
first decide on the formats. So if you
go over here to the column tools, you
can see that we have format for the
dates and in PowerBI we have a lot of
formats. I'm going to say the standards
is going to be this one. So the year,
then the month and day depend of course
on the region. But this one is compacted
and small. Look at this. It is not
taking so much space. So that means this
is going to be the standards on how to
show the format inside the data model.
Now we're going to do very annoying task
where I'm going to go through the whole
data model and make sure that all the
dates are using this format. Now of
course you can pause the video and do
it. I'm going to now fast forward just
to make sure this video don't explode.
So I'm going to do this pretty fast. So
let's go.
So that was the last fact in our data
model and with that we have now the same
format for the whole data model. Now
there is another thing that I usually do
in this phase as well since we are now
going through all tables. When PowerBI
sees a column as a number it going to
make it automatically like aggregatable.
So that means if you use it inside your
report PowerBI going to automatically
like summarize all the values. This is
of course nice thing but sometimes we
have numbers where it makes no sense to
summarize. So it's really nice if you
clean this in the data model before
going to the next phase so that people
don't make any mistakes. So now what
we're going to do, we're going to go
through all the tables one by one and
always keep your eye on this icon. That
means this column could be aggregated.
For example, here the budget can see
here the summarizations it is sum. If
you don't want it to get summarized,
you're going to go over here and say
don't summarize. So now you have to make
decisions almost for all your numbers.
I'm going to say for the budget it makes
sense of course to make maybe an
average. So I'm going to leave it as it
is. For the customers, well I'm going to
say maybe makes sense to make an average
out of this. So this is okay. So let's
go through all the dimensions. Same
things for the products. So that was the
last table, the last column and with
that all dates inside my data model is
following the same format. All right. So
that's what the first step. We made sure
that we are following the rules and the
standards on the format and everything.
Now we're going to go to the next step
that I usually do with that. I go and
create the dimension date. There are
many different ways on how to create
this. I usually do that in the back end.
So if I have a database or data bricks,
I go and create the dimension there. But
since now we are just doing PowerBI, I'm
going to show you a way on how to create
it directly in your data model. Uh there
is a really nice way. I'm going to say
very smart way actually from PowerBI.
Now I will not go and give you like a
CSV file or text with all dates inside
it and say hey this is your dimension
but this time we're going to go and
create it by getting inspired from the
data model. So how we going to do it?
You're going to go over here to the home
and here in the ribon we have something
called new table. So what we are doing
here we are like creating a new table
inside the data model and we're going to
go and call it since this is the
dimension dimension dates. Now there is
a very cool function in PowerPI called
calendar auto. So read this. It returns
a table with one column of dates
calculated from the model automatically
and this exactly what it does. It go and
scan the whole data model understand the
range of our business. So understand
what is the earliest date and what is
the latest date and just create one
column based on that. Very very cool. So
actually that's it. We don't have to
give it any arguments and hit enter.
Amazing things. So look at this. The
earliest date is the 1st of January 2025
and the latest date is the end of 2026.
And of course this my friends going to
expand automatically as the business
grow. So that means if the data sets
like grow over the time and you have
2027, you don't have to deal with the
dimension date because it going to grow
automatically. So suddenly you're going
to have as well in the dimension date
2027. I can tell you this is magic
really. In my old days as I done
business intelligence with other tools
that was one of the biggest struggles
where I had like a manual table and I
have to always add a new years and stuff
like that. And I can tell you many
people forget to update their dimension
dates and of course this cause a lot of
problems in the report because almost on
each report you are doing like analyzes
over the time and you will be using this
dimension. So this is one of the most
important dimension compared to the
others and if you don't make sure it is
always up to date it's going to be
catastrophic. But now we don't have to
deal with all this chaos. PowerBI did
solve this and everything now is
automatic. Just some trauma from my old
days. All right. So now what do we have?
We have only like one column right now.
What you can do, you can go of course
and change the format to our format. So
we need only the date. We don't need the
hours and time. And of course the next
step if you want to go and expand this
dimension to add more columns like for
example the year, the month, the day,
the full name of the day, the full name
of the month. So you can add a lot of
things to this dimension by just going
and adding like a new column. Like for
example, if I would like to get only the
year, I'm going to do something like
this year equal and then use the
function year and specify here the
column. So this going to be our
dimension date and that's it. So with
that we have the column called year and
I can do the same thing. So I'm going to
go and duplicate it. So that we have the
years. We can go and create another one
for the month. Same story. So month
equal the function month in order to
extract this part our column. So my
friends, we have a lot of date functions
that we could add in order to expand
this dimension, but I'm going to leave
it like this. Now, of course, the big
question is how we going to connect this
new dimension to our data model. So we
have it over here and there are like
many places where we could connect this.
Almost all our facts has dates right
now. The thing is we have a lot of fact
tables inside our data model that have a
lot of date fields and this dimension
date can play a very important role in
order to make the bridge between all
those facts. This going to be shared
dimension that going to help us in order
to compare all those numbers from
different facts. So this is going to be
our biggest shared dimension in the
whole model. So how we do it? It's very
simple. We're going to go through the
facts one by one and start connecting it
to our dimension. So here we have the
fact sales target. We grab the date and
connect it to our dimension date. Okay.
Same thing. We go to the next one. We
have as well date. So we connected our
dimension. All right. So now we have
like a shared dimension between those
two. And we can go and compare now the
numbers between those two facts. Now we
have here this factless fact. It is a
little bit weird. We don't have a date.
So that's why we will not connect
anything here. Let's go to the next one.
Here we have a month as well. We can go
and connect it to our dimension. Let's
go. And of course the most important one
over here we have the fact sales. So we
have the order date. We go and connect
it and say save. And the last fact table
here we have a lot of dates. So for
example I'm going to go and grab the
order date to the dimension. So now look
at this. Our dimension date is actually
a big shared dimension between a lot of
facts. Now this is amazing because now
we can do a lot of analyzes side by side
from all those facts. Let me just show
you an example. Let's go to the report
view. Don't know how we're going to do
it now. Very important as usual in order
to build the visual we start first from
the dimension. So the dimension date
this is going to build the axis for our
visual. And then after that we start
picking the measures from the different
facts like for example the fact sales.
We can go and now grab the total sales
and put it in the view. Perfect. Now we
can go to another one. For example the
fact sales target. This one going to be
on the month level. So the visual going
to looks weird but we can fix it if we
just remove the day from our date so
that everything is on the month level.
Now we can go to a third fact like for
example the inventories. Let's go and
drop the stocks or the units. This is
exactly my friends the power of the
dimension dates. We can go now and visit
all the facts and compare things side by
side very easily without losing the
numbers. Like you can see here the total
sales is always protected and you can do
now a lot of correlations and
comparison. So this is the main job of
the dimension date inside our data
model. Now of course what else we can do
with the dimension date? We can use it
in order to do roleplaying dimension.
Like for example we have here a huge
fact table with a lot of dates. Right?
So we have the order date, the invoice
date, the pay date. Now we can go and
connect our new dimension multiple times
to this fact. Let me show you how to do
it. So let me just bring this fact here.
And now we just grab the date to the
different columns. Like for example here
the pay date of course this going to be
inactive. Then one more time for the
ship date and another one for the
invoice date. And I think the last one
going to be the delivery date. So look
at this. Our dimension date is playing
five different roles for this fact. But
of course you're going to do this only
if you really need it. Otherwise this
going to looks really ugly. So don't go
randomly like connecting the date for
every column. Sometimes we don't really
need it like for example if I'm just
like analyzing the sales I don't really
always to go and get the dimension date
so actually I can go and build the
visual completely based on the fact
sales I have there the order date I have
everything so if your analyzis is based
only on one fact table then we don't
really need the dimension date but only
if you are like comparing multiple fact
then we go to the dimension of course
and with that my friends means we don't
have to go crazy and connect the
dimension date every single single date
column that we have in the data model
only if it's needed and if you create
something like this then you have to go
and start like building DAX calculations
for each inactive relationship so that
you can use it actually in your reports
but if it is not needed then don't go
and create all those relations now our
dimension date looks crazy and this is
usually how this dimension looks like at
the end so my friends this is the topic
of the dimension date I usually do it at
the end just to have a big picture first
about all my fact tables and only then
at the end I go and connect the
dimension date. Okay. So now we come to
very important step in data moduling
that a lot of people actually skip at
this phase. We have to go and create the
measures. Now the thing is yes we have a
good star schema we have good structure
everything is connected correctly the
filter direction and all those stuff.
But now if you go and hand this over to
your project team and everyone start
like building on top of it reports and
visuals. Now what could happen is that
multiple people going to go and start
creating multiple versions of
calculations that actually are
calculating the same thing over and over
and nobody going to know which one is
the right one for the data model. Now
another thing that might happen is that
people that are working with the data
model they might not yet develop like
understanding of the grains of your
facts. So for example they might go to
the fact sales and say you know what I
have to go and calculate the total
number of orders. So they go and create
calculation where they're going to count
the order ids which is totally wrong.
The green there is the line of order. So
in order to do it correctly they have to
do count distinct on the order ID. That
means this going to lead to wrong number
even if the data model is perfect. So
that means in this phase our job is not
only to structure and build a perfect
star schema but as well we have to go
and prepare the measures side by side
with our data model just to make sure
that we reduce the confusion. And of
course I'm not saying here we have to go
and now create all the measures for
everything that we have in the data
model. We just have to go and create the
core measurements but think that we are
sure it's going to be reused over and
over in many reports. And by the way not
everyone is working in teams. If you are
solo data analyst this is as well good
for you. I'm pretty sure over the time
you're going to have like multiple
PowerBI projects and you're going to
forget about the grains and the data
model. So you protect yourself making
different versions of calculations and
as well making wrong calculations. So my
friends this is exactly what we have to
do now. We have to go and create a
bundle of measures. All right. So now
how we going to do it? There's like two
ways. Either you're going to go to each
fact and inside them you're going to
start create the individual measures or
there is like another way that I like to
do and many others as well is to go and
bundle let's say the major measurements
inside one fake table. Let me show you
how to do it. So we're going to go over
here and say okay new table. Now I'm
going to call it underscore in order to
have it at the top. Then measures equal
nothing. With this we got like an empty
table here on the top. And now inside it
we're going to go and start creating all
the measures of the data model. So
that's during creating the reports
you're going to have it all in one place
and it's going to be easy to go and drag
and drop stuff. And if you want to
update your measures, you go directly
here and start updating. So now this is
our new measure that we have. Of course
we will not connect it to anything. I'm
just going to go and move it here side
by side with the security so that we can
see okay this is my star schema and
those are the let's say the add-ons on
top of it. Now let's go to the maybe
report view and create a new tab. I'll
just start now and create like few major
measures inside our data model. So let's
start with the fact sales like for
example here it's very obvious that's
one of the major measures it is the
total sales right. So how we going to do
it? We're going to go to the measures
over here and right click on it and say
new measure. Then we just create like
very simple DAX calculations. So for
example total sales equal to the sum of
the fact table sales and now you pick
the column. So line total and actually
that's it. Now what we do actually after
that we decide like on the format of
this measure like for example I'm going
to have the thousand like separator.
Actually I don't want it as a decimal
number. So I just want it always to be a
whole number so that everything is
formatted and is ready in order to be
used in my reports. So now by just drag
and drop from this measure I'm going to
get the total sales without worrying
about how this is calculated. So that
was an obvious thing. Then we have to
keep thinking okay what could we
measure? Well very important the total
number of orders. So we're going to go
and create a new measure total orders
equal. Now we want to count how many
orders that we have in the business. So
we're going to say okay count but again
since the grain is line of total we're
going to go and use the distinct count
and we're going to say okay fact sales
the order ID. So actually that's it. Now
of course we can think about how we're
going to format it. So it's going to be
as well the thousand's going to be
separated and it is a whole number which
is correct. So if I go drag and drop
same thing I got that total number of
orders which is correct. So as you can
see this is the whole job. We're going
to go through all the facts one by one
and we start creating those measures.
But we have just to focus on the main
things that we are sure that's going to
be used in many reports. Like for
example, we can go and count the total
number of active customers. So there is
like a difference between all the
customers that we have inside the data
model. For that we can go and count it
from the dimension customer. But if you
want to know how many customers are
actually ordering things, then you have
to go to the fact sales. So we can go
over here and say okay new measure total
active customers equal as well distinct
count because we're going to go to the
fact table. So fact sales and here we
need the customer ID. So this is the
count from the fact. Now we can go and
create another one that is actually
counting from the dimension. So base
maybe total customers equal. This time
we can just go and use the count for the
dimension because we don't have
duplicates. dimension customer and here
we pick as well the ID over here same
thing if you have a lot of customers you
can go and start like separating things
with a th00and now what else we can do
we can go to another fact like for
example here we have the fact order
process we can go and calculate the
average number of days from the first
step to the last step so now how we
going to do this measure first we have
to go and create maybe a column let me
just go back over here to the table view
so look at this we have all the steps
and I would like to go and calculate how
many days that we have between in the
first step the order date and the last
step the pay date and with that we're
going to get like a new measure for this
fact and in top of it we're going to go
and create a new calculation. So let's
go and do that. First of all we need a
new column because we need calculation
on the row level. So for example this
going to be order to pay. Now we just
want to find the differences between two
dates. So there is a function called
date diff. The first date is the order
date. The second one is the last one. So
it's going to be the pay date. And what
is the difference? We are calculating
how many days not month or year. So this
is the part that we are interesting in.
And actually that's it. So look at this.
Now we are getting the total number of
days that it took from the order to the
payment. Now the next step is very
simple. We're going to go and create a
new measure in our collection where
we're going to say like for example
average order to pay equal average. Then
we just go and pick our new measure. So
it is the order to pay. So look at this.
Now we have another measure based on
another fact. But everything now
together. So now if you are building a
report, all what you have to do is to
just go and open this one and start
browsing all the measures of this data
model. But of course again you don't
have to go and sit and think about each
single detail. Just create the obvious
one. Okay. Now I'm going to say for now
I'm going to stick with this. This is a
good collection of measures that we can
hand over together with the data model.
[music] All right friends, now we are
getting very close. We have now the last
step in the last phase. We have to make
sure that our data model is secure. So
that means we have to go and apply the
role level security mechanism on top of
our data model. Let's go and do that.
Okay. So now again we have our star
schema. We have those measures and the
last add-on that we have to add is the
security. Now first of all to make sure
that the security is ready we have to go
back to the power query and make sure
that everything there is ready and
clean. Okay. So this going to be our
last table inside the stage the
security. Now quickly by looking to this
you can see the header informations are
not correct. So this should be the
columns and yes we still have to follow
the naming convention. So I'm going to
go and rename things. This is the user
email and this is my friend the region.
All right. Now the last step is that I'm
going to go and grab it actually to the
other supports. So with that I don't
have anything more in the stage that I
have to work on. Look at this. We have
here the dimensions. We have the facts
and the support going to be the security
table since it doesn't belong to those
two. All right, let's close and apply.
All right, now look at this. It start
connects to our data model. But I have
to make sure that it is correct. So
let's go and just remove it. So we
didn't need this relationship. And about
this one is actually correct. So now
again let's first understand the
security that we have here. So let's
just talk about it. This is the
security. Look at this. Here we have the
user email addresses. Those are the
employees of our business. and it looks
like they are assigned to specific
regions. Now, of course, in order to
build this, we have to talk to the
security officers of our company and
understand how the security works. They
might say, you know what, each employee
in our company is allowed to see only
specific region. Like for example, Nora
can see only the North America. She is
not allowed to see the sales that are
happening in Europe or Middle East. Same
thing for hands. Hans can see only
Europe sales. So, we have to understand
the security requirements before we
start like connecting things. So we
cannot go blindly like making a security
concept for the data model and only
after understanding then we can start
connecting things together and then of
course the next step is to think okay
where are the region informations in
which facts in which dimensions we can
see that of course it is very obvious if
you go to the dimension customers you're
going to find over here the region
information. So this is a very good
starting point. Of course the question
is how we going to connect this security
to our data model and we usually do it
on top of dimensions because dimensions
anyway go and filter the fact tables and
the security table going to be filtering
this dimension. Now it's very obvious
that we have the dimension customer
where we have the region over here. So
this is a perfect candidate where we're
going to connect our security on top of
this so that the user can see only
specific customers and this will be
filtering as well our facts. So this is
one way on how to create the security.
There is another way on how to do it is
to go to the geographic dimension as
well. Here we have regions and this one
is connecting as well directly to our
fact which is really as well good
candidate that we could use in order to
filter our data model based on the
security. Now how we going to decide on
this? Usually I do it like this. I go
back to the data model and look to those
two dimensions. So I can see here for
example let me zoom in. This is the geo
dimension and you can see it is
connected to the fact sales. So now if I
put the security on top of this it going
to go and filter only one fact table.
But now the other one the dimension
customer it is actually connected to two
facts. The fact sales and the fact order
process. So if I connect the security on
top of this, I'm going to benefit in
order to secure actually two facts,
which is of course a nice thing. So I'm
going to go and decide actually on
connecting the security on top of the
dimension customers just because it
secures more facts for me. But again
based on the requirements we have to do
those stuff and now I saw like some
weird scenarios where people go and say
you know what I want to secure the whole
data model without any reason. So they
start like forcing somehow the data
model to use the security table on top
of each facts. So they start like doing
crazy things like by merging the facts
just in order to get the region column
inside each fact and they destroy the
grain because of this just to add the
security at the end. Maybe this is
totally unnecessary. So always
understand the security requirements and
only apply it when it's needed. You
don't have to secure every single
dimension and fact. Like for example, is
it really bad to show the dimension
products for all our employees? I think
it is no harm if they see the whole
data. So that means for our project,
let's say that we're going to apply the
security on top of those two facts, the
sales and the orders. So now how we
going to do it? It's going to be very
simple. We're going to go and build a
relationship between the security and
the dimension. So we're going to go over
here and say, okay, region by region,
one to many relationship, and the filter
is single direction. We have to make
sure it is going in the right direction,
of course. Well, yes. Look at this. The
filter direction of the security is
going to the dimension and the filter
direction of the customers is going to
both the fact sales and the fact order
process. So this looks perfect for
security. Of course the next step is
that we're going to go and start
creating the manage rules. Otherwise
this will not work. So it's going to be
very simple. We're going to go and
create a new role. Let's go and call it
regional access. And of course in which
table we are building the security. It's
going to be on the dimension customer.
and we're going to write a DAX
calculation in order to secure it. So
we're going to go and switch to DAX.
Okay. So this is going to be very
simple. We are just writing the DAX
filter expression where we're going to
say okay I want to show only the rows
where the region is matching the user
region. So that means it has to go and
find up what is the region for our
current user. So it is inside the
security table the region. then it
should match the email address that we
have in the security with the user
whoever is opening the PowerBI reports
and for that we have a nice function the
user principle name. So very simple
thing so it is not that hard we are
saying just check each row and ask this
question does the region belong to the
person that is looking at the report if
yes then keep the row otherwise go and
drop it. So it is just a filter
expression that going to help us to
filter the rows based on the region. Of
course actually that's it. Let's go and
save it. Very important that we are
getting green. Now let's go and close
it. All right. So with this we have
applied the role of the security on top
of our data model. But of course we
don't trust until we test. So how we
going to test it? I need one email like
one of the employees. So for example
Nora I'm going to go and copy its value.
Then go back to the model. And now we
can try to view the model as Nora is
opening the report and seeing it. How to
do it? We can go over here and say view
as then we have to specify the rule that
we just created. So the regional access
and we want to see it as another user
not as par because otherwise it's going
to take the informations of my users but
we want to see it as Nura. Okay. So
let's set okay. Then you can see we're
going to get like a warning. The
original access is activated and we are
viewing the object as Nora email. So now
let's go and test. Look at this. We are
already seeing like less details than
before. So the total sales is not
anymore the total number of sales of the
whole data model and we are seeing only
the total sales that is based on their
Nora's region. Of course we can test
this as well by going to the dimension
customer and let's go and grab the
region. So you can see we are seeing
only the North America. So my friends
that means the dimension is working. The
fact table is as well working and of
course the last test. Let's go and
remove this effect. So if I stop
viewing, look at this. Suddenly I'm
going to see the total sale for
everything and as well I'm going to see
all the regions. Of course now you can
go and pick another email and test that.
But for me it is already working and we
have applied the roll security on top of
our data model. All right friends, oh my
god I can say that we are done. We made
it. Just sit back, look at this and
enjoy it because this is awesome. And
remember at the very beginning I showed
you this beautiful chaos and the
nightmare data model where we had the
many to many relationships everywhere.
The filters are going from one table to
another just in all directions. No star
schema nothing makes sense full chaos.
But now look back to this. We have clean
healthy star schema or let's say galaxy
where we have fact tables and surrounded
with dimensions. Every relationship and
every filter is going to the right
direction. The numbers are protected and
everything is friendly and easy to read.
And I can tell you this one was not an
easy one. That was a really hard project
and complicated. And if you stayed until
the end and you build exactly this data
model with me, then my friend, you
should be proud of yourself. And I can
say welcome to the club with this, you
went with me through the journey exactly
like I do in my projects in my
companies. And I can tell you over all
projects I just met like only few people
that have this kind of skills where they
can turn a chaos data model into a clean
one because most people actually don't
know how to do data modeling and they
skip it. But my friends, we are not one
of them. We are the expert that can
build a real data model and this is
really a rare skill that many companies
need. So what I really recommend you is
to go and make this project as your
portfolio project. Of course feel free
to use it as your project. So go and
share it as well with the others in
LinkedIn and you can tag me if you want.
But what is way more important than
this, if you are searching for job and
you got interviewed, make sure to talk
about this project because this is
really rare. It going to makes you
quickly stand out the crowd. And if you
got hired or you are already at the
company and you joined a new project
where they have exactly the data model,
the chaos that I showed you at the
start, what's going to happen this time?
You will not panic. You're going to look
at it and smile because you're going to
remember exactly this project and you
know what to do. So now before we close
this project I would like to go through
all the most important points that we
have learned during the data modeling.
So let's recap the first point before
you build anything always take time to
analyze explore and understand. You have
to understand the business the processes
the data. The more you invest in
exploring the data and understanding the
business the easier things going to be
during building the data model. Then the
second point, always understand the
grain of your tables, dimensions and
facts and say it loudly what each row is
representing. Once you know that you
will not make mistakes as you are
connecting tables. Third point, always
set rules and standards before you start
the projects and always follow them
until the end. All the naming
conventions, the prefixes and so on.
Rule number four, always remove the
unnecessary data from the data model.
This is very important. Always ask, do
we really need those informations for
reporting? Is it really necessary? Never
be the person that's going to leave
things just in case. And the next one,
our goal is always to build the star
schema. All BI projects love that.
You're just going to make your life
easier with the calculations. And of
course, always avoid connecting fact
tables together. Just use a shared
dimension in between. And the filter
directions are always from the
dimensions to the facts. So my friends,
that's it. Yes, this is the whole
project. I really enjoyed making this
project. For a while, I thought that I'm
working at a company. I'm not recording
a video and I'm talking to a colleague.
I really had a lot of fun making this
project. I really enjoyed it. Now it's
time for you. So you have to go and
practice on your own. Maybe go and grab
any data model or your own data. Try to
make a healthy data model out of it. So
that's it my friends. I hope you enjoyed
this project with me. If yes, then
support the channel by subscribing,
liking, and commenting. Share it with
the others in order to reach nice people
like you. And I'm going to say thank you
so much for watching and I'm going to
see you in the next project. Bye-bye. At
you later, warehouse. See you on the
flippity flip.