[snorts] Hello everyone.
So get yourself ready.
And I have already my coffee.
So we are going soon live.
Ah, nice to see Black Soul is here as
well.
and we are live. Hi everyone.
So first of all I would like to say
welcome and I need to hear from you
whether you can hear me good because now
I have here completely new setup. I'm
using Mac after a long time. So I hope
that you hear me because I didn't test
to be honest. This is first time going
with this setup live. So let me know
whether you can hear me or not.
And I hear myself which is a good thing.
So let me just check where this come
from.
All right.
So, everyone can hear me. This is
perfect. Perfect starts.
Now, what I'm going to say, we going to
start with our live stream. Everything
is ready.
So, yeah, welcome everyone. I'm really
happy to go live again with you. It was
like a while, right, from last time. I
think we have done some interviews, some
data break stuff and finally I'm now
back to live. I have few topics that I
would like to discuss with you. Not only
about the data architecture, there are
some topics that I think it's only
suitable for live. So first of all, I
would like to say welcome. We're going
to talk about one topic which is the
data architects and the data
architectures. As I said, maybe if you
saw from the shorts that this is my
favorite role that I have done and yeah,
and it is something that is not that
easy to explain, but I'm going to try my
best to talk about it. So today, it will
not be a podcast. It will not be a
course. It's going to be, let's say,
just a talk. I might give you some
advices. I might sketch. Depends on,
let's say, how we're going to uh go
through the the agenda that I have for
you. So, I'm going to say I miss so
much. Going live with you. Thank you
first of all for everything, for the
support, for the nice comments. The
channel is going crazy, let me tell you.
I got I think this month the first time
we are getting around 2 million views in
a month, which is I think one of the
highest records in the data channels.
So, I'm really happy about it. I think
we are from top three channels now about
the data and that's all because of your
support. So, thank you so much for that.
I'm really happy about it and of course
I will keep pushing on that. Now, uh one
thing that I'm going to ask you just
make sure to not spam the chat make uh
our job easier as like for everyone to
ask questions and always stick with the
topic. So, we're going to speak about
today data architectures and architects.
Please don't ask about let's say h when
you going to be doing the DAX and the
PowerBI or other topics. Let's just
focus on the data architecture. So don't
spam the chat just ask questions that's
so that I can read it and answer you and
yeah what I'm going to say we have one
moderator. So thank you so much black
stole for joining us today and yeah
today going to be as as I said it is
about the data architect and
architectures. Um I would like to see
first of all in the chats how many we
have here data engineers and data
analysts because it really depends on
the audience whether I'm going to go
deep dive into let's say data architect
stuff or I have to be careful with the
data analyst that we have today. So, uh,
let me see how many data engineers and
data analysts that we have today here.
And, um, other than that, I'm going to
say
yeah. Um, I'm hearing myself. Let me
just
remove this here. All right. So, we have
here few data engineers, few data
analysts, we have students, uh, we have
freshers. Oh, we have a lot of data
analysts, which is going to be
interesting. Oh, let me see.
He did engineer data analyst.
Oh, yeah. Okay. We have a lot of data
analyst here as well. Now, [snorts] it
is not a big problem. Uh I'm going to be
like uh let's say giving you fundamental
things because there will be some data
engineering topics that I will be uh
yeah covering as well. So, it is
relevant for you whether you are data
analyst or data engineer. Don't worry
about it. I just want to have let's say
feeling about the audience. I got I got
the big picture. It is a mix and I I
know a little little bit from my channel
because I have a lot of PowerBI and
Tableau let's say viewers. Now we're
going to speak about the data architects
and what is the agenda about today. I
will give you today just an
introduction. Okay, this is something
not like we going to learn SQL or
PowerBI where we sit together like two
hours and now you are a data architect.
Okay, it is something that you're going
to learn over the time. All right. And
it is something that um um let's say
uh you cannot take a course and become a
data architect. It's like becoming a
manager. You know, you need experience.
You need to do a lot of projects. And
once you have a lot of let's say enough
experience, you can become let's say
data architect. But today what I'm
trying to do is I want to make your life
easier. Maybe to give you tips so that I
give you the mindset of how to think
like a data architects because it is one
of the highest paid let's say data roles
that you might have in a job. But we're
going to go in details about everything
about the job about the role about the
mindset about the skills and after that
we switch um let's say in the middle of
the stream where we going to talk about
data arch architectures topic like for
example what is a data warehouse what is
a data lakehouse what is a very
important to to understand what is a
data products what are the data mesh and
how we design data architectures okay so
we're going to speak about the concept
in the second half but in the first half
I want to introduce you to the job
itself so that you have good
understanding about it and you think
whether this going to be your career in
the future because you have always
different path but we're going to deep
dive into all those stuff now I would
like to let's say share my screen and
start like talk about this role but I
still here myself let me just find out
from where
let me just see here. Just second
thing from the studio here.
So,
okay. So, I'm going to make this like
this and then we're going to switch to
my screen and we start talking.
So, yes, perfect. You can see this right
now. Um where are we going to start?
Yeah. So who is the data architect? Just
a very simple definition or let's say
let's talk about it a little bit. It is
someone that actually plans. It is
someone that is before like doing any
implementations any like building
anything big at companies we need
someone that puts the plan for the
execution. And it is like you are
building uh I'm going to say you are
building a house right you have always
adapt you have an architect in order to
make the plan to build the house. So now
the process is very similar between
those two. So before you start planning
anything you have to hear the
requirements and this is exactly what a
data architect do. We sit together with
the stakeholders we hear the
requirements and start noting down what
they need what they want. So it's
exactly like you are planning to build a
house. You have the architect that is
collecting your requirements asking you
some questions understanding exactly
what do you need. Now after that what's
going to happen to that he or she going
to take the requirement and start making
a blueprint start making the plan to
build the house. Right? Same thing with
the data architects. You're going to go
or she going to go and start making the
plan to build the data system. This is
very important to understand this
because after that actually the data
architect going to hand over the plan.
Well, I'm this is very simplified but
they going to hand it over to the
builders. So the builders that's going
to build let's say uh the the house or
the data engineers or the data expert
that going to starts building the data
system. So it is un it is the core of
the data architects. They understand the
requirements. They
going to go and make a plan and then
hand it over to someone else. Well, this
is in a perfect word, but I'm going to
say this is the core of a data
architect. So that means if you like see
those three pictures, you have to have
communication skills. You have to have
skills on how to build the blueprint.
And you have to have the skills to hand
over the blueprints. Now I can tell you
again this is in a perfect world but in
reality things goes in different
directions. Now for me for example I
started at Mercedes-Benz as a solution
architects. So we have different bigger
terms on on how we define this. Um I'm
going to say I was end up doing multiple
roles. So we're going to be maybe the
data architect and at the same time we
might be developing and at the same time
maybe leading a project. So it is not
like let's say in the data world
something clear separation between roles
but in the perfect let's say on the
papers it is exactly like this. This is
what the data architect do. Now um the
next thing that I would like to show you
is I have done some analyzes about the
technical skills that is required
actually from a data analyst. Now
recently I've been doing a lot of work
at with AI where I was collecting a lot
of jobs. I was uh analyzing the data. I
collected around 20k jobs around about
the data. So uh jobs about the data
analyst, the data engineers, the data
architects. So different roles and I
start doing analyzes about what are the
skills that are required in the job
posting currently. Now I know from here
in Germany what are the requirements but
I would like to have like always up
todate image what is really requested
for a data architect for the data
engineer for the data analyst. So now
what I'm showing you now those are the
top skills that are required from a data
architect. Okay this is not about the
data engineers or data analyst. Now I'm
going to say about the technicality we
have of course technical skills and we
have soft skills. technical skills
almost every job posting is asking for
SQL data moduling we have the Azure data
bricks python data governance AWS and
snowflake so those are let's say the
skills that are mostly required from you
as a data architect but this is not the
most important thing because usually
data architect should not let's say
develop anything they just put a plan
right that's why what is way more
important is to understand what are the
let's say soft skills or let's say what
are the tasks that are requested from
you. So here I can say yeah
83% they ask the data architect of
course to design the data platform
architectures. This is our main job.
Then the other task is about the data
governance the catalog the contracts
designing a data model. This is really
interesting because to be honest I
didn't expect this that is requested so
much from the data architect. I expect
this from data analysts from data
engineers but actually they are many
expecting you as a data architect to do
data modeling. Now comes something very
important the mentoring and coaching
others. they expect from you as a data
architect to mentor the others to help
the others in order to implement the
plan and as well collaborating with
different departments gathering
requirements and so on. So those are
let's say I'm going to say the top
requirements
or this is what company expect from you
to do at the job as a data architect.
Now comes something very interesting
that I have done analyszis on it which
is how many years they expect from you
to be a data analyst and here the
average I've got seven years [laughter]
so you're going to see five years you're
going to see like 10 years 15 years but
the average um yeah it's going to be
between five to seven years and this is
totally expected this role it is not
like a data engineer or data analyst
where you go I don't am do some courses,
collect informations, uh learn SQL,
Python and those stuff and then you
enter a job with it. This is not an
entry job. This is a job that where you
grow with your skills during yeah
working as a data analyst or data
engineer. So that's why they requires
years and too many years in order to
enter it and this is of course the
picture is totally different if you are
data analyst or data engineer. So the
requirement is around 7 years and I
totally expect this because otherwise I
cannot expect a data architect that can
start working without any experience.
This will not work because again this is
something that you cannot learn from
courses and stuff like that. Now here
comes as well um what are the data
concepts that they mentioned from you to
become a data analyst. What are the top
topics? Like the thing is if you open
any job posting uh about data architect,
you're going to find a lot of terms,
right? They're going to say data
modeling, data architect, data
governance, quality and all those stuff.
So here I have a full listing of all
like let's say terms that are mentioned
in the job posting. Of course the number
one going to be the data architects or
architectures. Then it is the data
modeling. You have to have understanding
about the data platform governance
quality management data warehouses. You
see it's still one of the top requested
let's say skills or understanding uh
topic. You have the ATL data and
gestation integration lakehouse data
lake lineage. So um I'm going to say it
is not like all of them are requested.
This is just a collection of all let's
say data concept that you have to
understand. And now what I'm going to
try to to do today is try to explain
some of those concepts for you. And by
the way those concept it is not only
requested from a data architect I have
done here the analysis as well for an
engineer. So it is as well similar
things but with different priority like
for example data engineer the request
number one skill is the data pipelines
then ETL's data modeling and so on. So
there is like not a big difference
between architect and engineer. You have
to understand those concepts. And of
course, you can understand those concept
either by doing the job or reading about
it. Now, as I said, I'm going to give my
best today to walk you through some of
those concepts uh using sketches. And by
the way, we will not do coding today.
Yeah, we will just sit talk and sketch.
There's no coding. There's no project
that I'm going to do. It is just I want
to bring you the understanding about
this role. So with this you can
understand uh let's say they going to
require a lot of data concepts they're
going to request from you let's say a
lot of years and as well they're going
to like yeah request from you that you
have knowledge about how to build a data
architecture you have knowledge about
the governance how to design data model
and how to mentor the others so now I
just wanted to show you those numbers
before we dive in because I would like
you to understand let's say what is
currently uh requested and I have here
like some job posting about the thing
you can see here for example from aliens
here I think in Germany right no this is
in Barcelona so in Spain so this is one
of job posting about uh a data architect
and um you know if I zoom in a little
bit
you're going to see that they going to
request from you a long list of things.
So you have for example here to define
the data archite architecture the
blueprints
uh you have to translate uh let's say um
I'm going to say here the requirements
yeah to build the data architecture you
have to define the end toend data flows
um
so support the implementations this is
important yeah support the
implementations they don't request you
to do the implementation on yourself and
yeah uh what they going to request a lot
of things you can see understanding of
the data mesh the data lakehouse yeah
between 5 to 8 years uh data bricks
understanding or fabric you can see here
there is or yeah this is always
interesting to to see that none of the
companies going to request from you two
things at the same time not data bricks
and fabric you have to have only one of
them um yeah so you're going to see here
a long list of things that you they
expect from you and of course you can
understand all post stuff. I'm going to
say only by doing projects or by joining
today. [laughter]
I hope that I can give you as much as I
can today. And yeah, to be honest, I
don't have like um uh let's say this
first time I'm talking about this topic
uh in stream or in a video. That's why I
don't know how long this going to take
us today. So, it's going to take us
until my cafe is done or yeah, until I'm
um yeah, I'm tired. So now um I'm going
to now deep dive into
uh by the way I'm still not that good
using my Mac after 17 years working with
Mac with Windows I switched few month
ago. So that means now switching between
things it's always like a pain. Now
let's start. So how how I'm going to
explain for you because now data
architects we [snorts] have different
types. So let's start like this. I'm
going to grab this guy. By the way,
those are figure minifigures
that's uh adopted from my sketches. So,
uh I think you you if you watch my
sketches, you're going to understand
that some of them are from my my figures
here. And uh by the way, if you want me,
I could switch it to black uh dark uh
background, but I think for explanation,
it's always nice to have a white board.
Now, uh let's start with the first one.
You are a data engineer.
So,
and you join a team. We have a project
team. We have here the data analyst.
And what else do we have? Maybe we have
a manager. Do I have a manager here? I
should have a manager. Yeah, I have a
manager. So you have here a manager and
maybe team lead, you know, team lead.
Yeah. Now something like this. So I'm
just building a project team. All right.
So here we have like
uh a project team
like this. Uh this is project team.
Maybe I'm going to switch the font a
little bit.
Mhm. [clears throat]
All right.
So, this is one project team. Now, those
people are building something, right?
So, they are the builders. They are
building maybe a data warehouse. They
are building something. Now, as well,
we're going to have another team that is
doing something else. Okay? So, usually
we don't have only one team in a
company. And by the way, as I speak to
you about those stuff, I always think
about big companies, okay? Because I
have done um uh let's say my last three
uh let's say companies were big
companies. So I'm going to give you
always the big picture of big companies,
not mediumsiz or smallsized. Now it
start always like this where you join a
team, you have a team lead maybe you
have as well uh depends yeah on your
company you have a project lead.
So project lead
and you build something with this team.
Now the thing is during yeah building
the the project and stuff like that
you're going to find yourself that some
of those builders of so those data
engineers start doing activities like a
data architects like one of those
engineers starts drafting I don't know
whether I have here blueprint no so
starts like building yeah a data
architect so this is what I call a
casual
data architect.
So you're gonna find as I said yeah one
data engineer is sketching or she is
sketching like a picture saying ah we're
going to build it like this and um this
person is yeah let's say going in this
direction going in direction as a data
architect but it is not dedicated data
architect okay so this is someone in the
team building and at the same time
building architecture we cannot say this
is a dedicated one now over the time
what going happen that um
um that this person get promoted or the
department going to go and hire another
data architect.
Now this data architect going to be a
dedicated one. It is going will not be
like uh let's say the casual one. Okay.
So this is the dedicated data architect.
Now you can see I have made this person
outside of the teams because the data
architect now is not anymore
responsible for building one project.
He's not anymore part of a team. He is
like something in between. And uh to be
honest, I would like to go and switch
this to maybe dark mode. Let me just
check this
cuz this is too
Yeah. Let me know if you like this dark
mode. But uh I would like to turn it to
dark mode like this. Maybe it's better
for you to to see.
Now this data architect now is a
dedicated one. So this is situation
either going to be part of the team and
you are casual one like me at the start.
I was casual data architect. I was
building things or you get promoted over
the time and you become a data
architect. Now since you are not anymore
part of a team your job will not be
anymore building things. Your job is to
work between teams and starts building
the data architect for multiple
projects. So again this one is dedicated
the data engineer is dedicated only for
one team for one project but the data
architect once get promoted and once
start to be a dedicated data architect
like the job that I showed you you will
not be part anymore of a team you will
be building architectures for different
people or for different let's say
projects. So this I'm going to say we
are not done yet because there are like
multiple data architect types. So this
is the level of let's say the team
levels. Let me just make it like this.
So we are still talking about the level
of yeah building projects or doing
projects.
We are not speaking about the yeah the
top end of data architects. Now what
happened is that you're going to find as
well in the companies as you go up in
the hierarchy you're going to find that
you have let me see here do I have other
icons
yes you will start as you go on top you
will find those top managers okay the
companies so top managers
and you will start seeing new roles like
for example the shift data officer.
So this is as well elite jobs. Okay.
[snorts] So you have here the data
officer or the shift data officer and
then you're going to find people on top
like for example the shift security
officer
and yeah the roles yeah let's say those
people at the top they will be the
people that are actually putting the
strategy for the whole company they are
the planners the people that do um yeah
[clears throat]
so let me see here So planning strategy
um and with that I mean of course the
data strategy. So those people on top
they don't usually build they just make
strategy planning for the whole company
and and the word below they are the
builders. So that means if you are a
data architect, you still are working
between like two three teams or two or
three departments until if you decide to
go really up to join those elites.
You're going to be the principal data
architects. This is the le last level
for you. This is the principal
data architect. So once you get promoted
to the top, you're going to be with
those elites where you might be let's
say working as well with another
architect which is the enterprise
architect. This is not the data
architect. This is the enterprise
architect. And
and um again you will not find like 10
enterprise architects. You will not find
like 10 principal architects. You're
going to find like only few. So that
means if you see this picture it's going
to work like this. If you are data
engineer or data analyst, you start as a
casual
um architect and after that you get
promoted to become the dedicated
architects in the department in the
teams and the last level is you're going
to go as principal data architect which
is I'm going to say um one of yeah one
of the highest paid roles that you might
reach because if you look to
What are your options right as a data
engineer what are your options is either
um you're going to go my friends as a
manager right like team lead a
department lead whatever you go to the
management and you start getting
promoted promoted until I don't know
yeah you reach some high top management
role so this is the management
or The other option that you have is
actually is to go as an expert, right?
So you're going to be I don't know.
Yeah, the highest going to be senior
senior data engineer. Yeah, senior data
engineer, which I'm going to say, yeah,
it is good paid. You going to get some
good money about it, but it you cannot
reach an elite level, okay, with this.
you're going to be okay an expert that
can yeah work and do project and stuff
like that but you cannot be yeah high
paid at a companies um and the next one
is actually the career
whether you're going to go as an
architect and the architect role
it is something that can open the door
for you to reach let's say the elite
level at companies but still enjoying
your job because to be honest I don't
like the management roles. It is
something that you still let's say um
taking your knowledge yeah with the tech
knowledge with your experience and still
having fun in the job without like uh
being a manager. So what I'm trying to
say is that
the data architect role it is amazing
opportunity for you to reach high level
at companies but without
yeah going as a manager if you don't
enjoy managing people if you don't enjoy
I don't know yeah having conflict
between uh in your teams and the
politics behind management and all those
stuff then the architect it is like an
amazing role that you can reach really
high at companies and you get as well
equally paid. Yeah. Like other people
like data officer or security officer or
even a top manager. So it is an amazing
role and uh with that you're going to
find those yeah I'm going to say those
are the three roles that you can reach
as a data
uh architect and now I'm going to be
honest with you. I was something in
between.
I was here. I Yeah, I was leading
projects in my last two jobs and um
yeah, I'm still living in Germany by the
way. [laughter]
You want me to go back to the whites? Um
yeah, if you guys want me to do that, I
can do it.
But I think the font is not that that
good.
So now I think I burn all your eyes
[laughter]
now. Yeah, I think the font I hope that
you can see it well. So
all right. So um I keep going. I'm going
to keep switching. Yeah, if you keep
asking me. No. So no where I was. Yeah.
So what I was trying to say is there is
not one type of data architect. uh there
are like different levels and I was in
between I was like this and um I was
trying to become let's say manager at
Mercedes-Benz but then I decided no I'm
I would like to stay in the technical
aspects I like to do projects I like to
build I'm builder I'm not let's say
manager and I was targeting one of those
roles at the top so before I leave
Marcus Spence I was targeting this one
here
And uh I know a lot of uh let's say
principles data architects I know their
mindset and I know their stuff. So I was
trying to jump to here and uh then I
left to do content. [laughter]
So I was this guy here and that's why I
will be explaining for you stuff that
you can do and as a data architect. So I
hope with this it is clear for you the
uh let's say the levels and that what
are the different types um and uh yeah
which one you are responsible for what.
So again the data architects between
departments you have to look between
different uh let's say projects. If you
are a data architect inside the team you
decide only for your small scope and if
you go on the top then you are deciding
for the whole company for the whole
thing. Now this is about the rules.
Let me check what we're going to do
next.
Yes. Um
okay. So now we're going to go and I'm
going to show you a few things about how
a data architects looks like.
Some might sit.
Don't know where I have put it.
Just trying to find the sketch that I
have prepared for you.
that architecture
house three times. I think I lost it.
Let me find.
Give me a second. I'm going to find you
here something.
So,
do I have it here?
Okay. Until I find it, I'm going to jump
to another thing.
Oh, I have it. Wait, wait, wait, wait. I
have it. I have it here. So, let me grab
this over here. Now, we spicked about a
little bit. Yeah. About the data
architect and um yeah, what he or
I hope you are seeing. Let me check
whether you are seeing my screen. Yes,
you are seeing my screen. Let me make
myself a little bit smaller. All right.
So, now look at this. Now the thing is
uh if you are new, if you are data
analyst or engineer, you are student,
you are still learning um and you start
like searching about the architect
architectures and the different types
and stuff you might get confused very
very fast my friends because there are a
lot of different types a lot of
different diagrams on how people draw
architectures and there is a lot of
let's say misunderstanding what is
really that architecture okay because uh
if you Google and go to images and and
you search for I don't know Azure
architecture or data architecture you're
going to find different pictures and I I
want you here to have some awareness
about what is really data architecture
now here we have some random image I'm
going to say that looks like data
architecture from Azure from Microsoft
but my friends this is not a data
architecture yes we have here yeah
sources on the left sides we have
pipelines we have storage we have I
don't know yeah streaming ing events,
uh, consumers and stuff like that. This
is not a dict architect architecture,
sorry. If you draw something like this
at companies, they're going to throw it
at your face because my friends, this is
not something that's uh, yeah, going to
explain anything for the company. This
is only a vendor architecture.
This is a vendor trying to sell their
products for for you for the companies.
So here Microsoft is explaining for you
use my tools to do all those stuff. So
if someone asks you uh draw for us a
data architecture and you draw this this
then this is of course wrong. Okay. So
this is not a data architecture. This is
just a vendor architecture.
Now if I go to the next one. No
let me just zoom out.
I told you I still have problem with my
Mac. [laughter]
I'm zooming out like crazy. Now, let me
just refresh here.
[snorts]
Yeah. Okay.
I I because I clicked. Okay. Okay. So,
this is not a data architecture. Now,
let's move to the next one. Same thing
here. You might see this picture and
say, "Wow, this is perfect. Look, look
at this. We have uh bronze, silver,
gold, we have delta lake, we have I
don't know Unity catalog, PowerBI
fabric. Perfect. If I am becoming data
architecture, I'm going to draw this
one, right? This is my reference to
become data architecture. Again, this is
wrong.
This is not a data architecture, my
friends. This is again vendor
architecture. Once you start seeing a
lot of let's say um yeah icons about
platforms and tools then this is this is
not a dirt architecture this is
something someone trying to sell
platforms try to sell tools. So um I saw
a lot by the way I saw a lot a lot of
people at companies they yeah they say
yeah I am an architect and they start
drawing stuff and they come up with this
picture. Yeah this is really bad. So
this is not something that's you should
let's say provide as a solution for
companies then you are just uh trying to
sell the company tools. Okay, this is
bad. Now we come to the data bricks. You
see here as well data bricks have a lot
of pictures and they say yeah this is an
architecture and stuff like that. Well
again this is a vendor thing. So once
I'm going to say once you see a lot of
just icons like Spark uh logos yeah
PowerBI event hub and blah blah blah
this is a vendor architecture this is
not a data architecture and this is the
worst this is one of the worst that I've
seen in Google
someone as well is saying this is a
architecture you can see here it's just
random boxes and random uh uh let's say
um uh tools that they throw go around
and they say this is a data
architecture. This makes no sense. You
of course you can add of course you can
add yeah icons and logos and stuff but
you cannot call this that architecture.
Yeah, they're going to throw it at your
face. Um now we come here. This is
something that we I'm going to say
getting closer to become data
architecture. Yeah. So I'm going to say
I like this one. Yeah. It is very high
level of course but at least I know the
flow of data. I know all right there is
like data sources they go to data
storage there is streaming processing we
are doing in between machine learning we
have analytical data store and
analytical reporting and we have to do
orchestration. So you can see this image
from Microsoft Azure they don't have
here any let's say logos. Yeah, they are
not trying to sell their products but at
least I'm going to say I understand the
flow of data. I'm not this is like a
marketplace of tools like I'm not
understanding what is going on here.
What happens in Spark? What happens? I
don't know. Yeah, in DBT and like are we
storing that like it's very confusing.
Yeah, that's why you cannot sell this as
a data architecture. Yeah, this one is
close and we get closer. Yeah, this as
well. I like it because it is as well
listing out what are the different
sources that you have in the company. We
are here speaking about the engions. We
are speaking about the processing. We
have here data cleaning, data
transformation. And then it says we have
here three layers. The role, clean and
created. And we have here data
governance and stuff like that. Yeah.
And how to consume it. So my friends
this is closer yeah to data
architecture. I just want to bring you
the awareness that not everyone that go
and throw through you uh yeah some logos
and boxes and say now I have a data
architecture from company or you can go
and take a reference architecture from
data bricks or Azure and say hey look I
know now how to do it in the company and
we can do it like this right you are
just another guy selling Microsoft
products for a company you are not
selling any solution you are not Like
yeah this is not something that you can
do my friends. Of course if you are
discussing tools yeah in the companies
and you are discussing what which yeah
which service we're going to use which
service stuff but this is something that
a cloud cloud architect going to do not
you not a data architect. So again I
just want to bring this awareness for
you because I saw many people do that
and of course I'm not saying it should
be boring like this. Yeah, this is
totally boring. Yeah. To have u to have
only boxes and stuff like you can mix
you can start mixing a little bit to say
yeah in the analytical you could use for
example PowerBI. Yeah. But uh it would
be nicer if you speak more about uh
let's say what is exactly the use cases
how the data stored how the data move
and stuff like that. And here for
example I don't know whether you have
done with me the uh the SQL warehouse.
It is as well here I tried to draw for
you something like close to a data
architecture. So you can see uh we went
through okay we have bronze silver gold
we have two source systems and we have
put here some contracts data contracts
on the data architects where we explain
you know we are storing here tables uh
we are doing here patch processing we
are doing full load we are doing
truncate and insert the data model going
to stay as it is. So we are adding some
descriptions about what's going to
happen inside each of those boxes. This
is what we have to understand. Yeah.
From data architecture. We have to
understand what going to happen with my
data inside this one big picture and not
what tools I have to buy for the
company. This Yeah. So I hope that it is
clear for you. Now uh have here drafted
something little bit complicated but we
will not go in details but it is
something as well like an enterprise
data architect but I'm not going to go
through it now we can stay with this. So
with this I hope you understand what do
you mean with the data architecture
and um yeah this is just a way on how to
explain how the data yeah move around.
Now, of course, we're going to deep dive
into how to do those stuff. It depends
on the time, of course. Um, so this is
something that I want to raise an
awareness about it so that you know what
do we mean with those stuff. Now,
um,
what I would like to give you now, I
would like to go through the mindset a
little bit. Let me just have a drink of
water. I hope you are enjoying
[laughter] what I'm trying to say.
So now um
of course uh the question is why we are
drawing those stuff? Why do we draw
those pictures? Is it like just because
it is a nice thing to see or like yeah
you want to show off
how how uh the architecture looks like?
So why we draw those stuff? It's just
you have to understand
um maybe I I want to go maybe switch
because I don't have anything now to say
to show you
now of course the question is why we
draw those architectures right um the
thing is we draw those stuff not to show
off we are not trying to here uh to show
the company yeah I can draw you stuff we
are using visuals in order to bring
understanding
It's like a data analyst, right? If a
data analyst want to explain the story
behind the data, they make visuals, they
use data visualizations, right? They
make like those charts, they make um
yeah some aggregated data and they make
like bar chart and all those stuff
because they want to use the visuals to
explain it. It is the same thing. We
draw those diagrams
for us in order to explain something
through the visuals. It is first of all
helping us. Um yeah, I have by the way
coffee. [laughter] I have it here.
Uh so yes it's going to help us to
understand what we are planning to build
because
think about it like if you want to build
a house and you don't have any plan you
don't have any visual you sit with
someone and and going to say okay trust
me I'm going to make for you four rooms
I'm going to make for you a kitchen like
imagine it with me the kitchen going to
be left right and the guy talking to you
about your house without a picture right
without a visual So you're going to
start imagining something in your head.
He going to imagine something in your
head and at the end you're going to get
something that is not meet maybe meeting
your expectations. So that's why before
we build anything we have to draw we
have to build those diagrams in order
that we communicate a plan for everyone.
First of all for you yourself like if
you want for example to make plan like
maybe you create a big documents about
it but you have to uh let's say in order
to bring this document for you to
understand it to draw the visuals to
draw the diagrams. So it is helping you
to understand what is your plan and is
as well helping others like if you are
meeting managers stakeholders or let's
say nontechnical people you want to show
them the plan. Yeah, you cannot just
explain. You want to show them the
pictures and as well it going to help
everyone let's say in the developers or
let's say data engineers and stuff like
that. It's going to help them to
understand what is what are you talking
about. So the visuals it is just a tool
to communicate your plan with the
others. That's why we draw those
diagrams and there are no rules on how
to do it. You can make it boxes, you can
make it from left to right, from up to
bottom. You can make it the way that you
want. There is no like how to uh I'm
going to say standards how to draw those
stuff. It is just instrument for you in
order to communicate your plan. So there
is no wrong and right. But don't try to
draw only tools because it is not
helping anyone. And uh I'm going to say
it is just a tool that's um yeah it is
just a tool in order to communicate your
plan. So that's why uh it's going to be
our main tool in order to communicate uh
let's say things. Now there are some
mistakes I'm going to say here listed
few mistakes that I would like to tell
you about it. Uh I met a lot of
architects around uh that say yeah I'm
an architect I'm making now the
architecture for the department and they
start like yeah doing um yeah strange
things let's say at the company. So
there are few patterns that I have seen
that I [snorts] would like to tell you
about. Like for example, you're going to
see a guy yeah that is just discussing
tools. They never discuss let's say
the problem itself. So this is one of
the biggest mistakes. If you start to
think like an architect but you end up
just talking about tools. If I talk to
you, you only speak with me about
PowerBI, Tableau. You speak about
Snowflake and data bricks. You just
speak about Azure and AWS. You just
speak about tools. And this is one of
the biggest mistake I'm going to say as
a data architect. You should speak about
the problems. You should speak about the
data, the flow, the company uh let's say
uh pains. You have to speak about how to
build an architecture that going to
serve multiple use cases. So I saw this
pattern when you have a tool guy that is
just talking about tools. Now another
thing that's a big let's say yeah issue
you're going to find some architects
that know only theory but never do any
projects and this is a big problem. So
um if you find yourself let's say
somehow you became a data architect at
the company and you haven't done any
project yourself believe me you will not
succeed. In order to become a data
architect, first you have to be someone
doing projects. So first don't jump to
this role without doing project at
yourself. You should be first a data
analyst. You should be first a data
engineer. You cannot be a data architect
that have never done projects and then
just jump from the theory watching I
don't know maybe stream like this and
jump immediately to become data
architect because uh this is something
that I've seen a lot as well. data
architects that have no idea how things
works but they have a lot of theory.
They know what is data warehouse, what
is data lakehouse and they start
discussing things but they are always uh
let's say have no idea whether this is
going to work. So they only know knew
the theory.
Um another mistake that you could do as
a data architect is that you don't think
about the budget.
um you go and let's say yeah you see
data bricks architecture you see
snowflake architecture you start
thinking about building I don't know
yeah lake houses warehouses and stuff
like that a lot of tools platforms but
you are not taking into account whether
you have a budget for it whether the
company not you whether the company
gonna have a budget for it so [snorts]
this is as well a big issue that I'm
gonna see a lot of yeah architects that
they think they have endless amount of
money in the company and they are ready
to do whatever he says. Uh this is a big
issue because if you don't know the
budget that the company has at the end
to spend in order to do your plans
you're going to make some unrealistic
plans for the companies and other ends
no one going to implement it for you.
Yeah. So that's why as an architect
always think if I'm bringing this
concepts is like do we have enough money
for it? Does the company gonna be
willing to pay for it? Like for example,
if I join smallsized company, I would
never ever try to speak about oh let's
go and build data products, let's go and
make data mesh concept and they start
like dreaming big and at the end the
company has like few databases and
that's it. They just want to do few
reporting. So this is as well a big big
issue that I've seen um data architects
um not thinking about the budget that
they have not thinking about the
limitations that the companies have. So
this is something uh that as well a big
mistake that you could do as an
architect. Another one is
um you make overgineered or let's say
overkill con. It's like similar a little
bit about the budget that
the company don't need too much. Yeah.
And you start bringing Yeah. Again the
company just needs some reporting and
that's it. And you start bringing like
big crazy idea to make a data mesh to
make lakeouses. So again you are not
making uh let's say concept that are
unrealistic.
So um always be realistic. I'm going to
say understand the limits of the
company. understand what they need and
then design of course the architecture
for it. Um, another like let's say
mistakes that I've seen that you're
going to find some architects that they
they draw a lot. They make a lot of
diagrams like crazy. Like for example,
you ask okay what is the plan and then
he or she of course open the I don't
know their folder or stuff like that and
they have like 10 or hundred of images
and visuals and they start like showing
you multiple architectures and say ah we
could go this direction and then they
show you ah this is last year this is
this year so he keep drawing like crazy
all time he has like I don't know 10 or
20 diagrams that keeps switching between
as he's talking to you. This is one of
the biggest mistake I'm going to say for
me. I worked I think in a project for
five years at Mercedes-Benz. I used only
one diagram only one and it was more
than enough. It was very famous even in
the company because I always stick with
the same images with the same picture
and everyone can remember it. So it gets
bigger and bigger over the time, but I'm
using the same fonts, the same logos,
the same icons, the same shapes. I had
only one. So my advice for you, don't go
and draw like I don't know. Yeah, more
than two or one. Just stick with with
that and that's it. But um yeah, this is
as well one big issue. You see architect
that they get overwhelmed. they like if
you talk to them they start immediately
making a new sketch a new visuals a new
charts and new diagrams and yeah they
get lost and they lose the others as
well. Um there is another thing is that
as a data architect especially if you
are a data architect let's say dedicated
one for multiple projects
uh try to you you yeah you should not be
pious to specific projects like for
example let's say in a department we
have three data warehouses
and um yeah because you build one of
them that doesn't mean that you as a
data architect that you always try to
merge the other warehouses to this one.
So what I'm trying to say is you have to
be unbiased about your solutions, your
discussions and try to not have a baby,
not have like one uh let's say system
yet try to defend it all time just
because you like it. Okay.
Um this as well yeah goes to the second
second point that I saw as well many
mistakes like you get a data architect
that yeah make a diagram make yeah some
diagrams some stuff and then uh over the
time things changed okay so at the start
maybe it was working for yeah PowerBI
reporting and stuff and then suddenly we
are getting AI use cases and you're
going to find this yeah the architect is
not trying to adapt
So they try to be very defensive with
their architecture and they try to let's
say even if it goes wrong yeah over the
time they still try to defend it and try
let's say storn yeah and not try to
adapt with a new word. So this as well
I've seen I've seen some people they
make one picture and never change over
the time they don't add to it anything
new. If it's not working he going to
defend it until the end. this as well
something uh bad and uh this bring me to
the next thing is that I've seen
architects that they just draw a picture
they make some presentations PowerPoint
and stuff and then they let's say leave
to something else so they just draw
things and then leave draw things and
leave so they jump between projects and
they don't track what is going on
afterward is my plan is working it's not
only you make a plan and you leave you
have to keep mentoring the others. You
have to bring the others in order to
implement the plan. So it is not
something else. You take the
requirements as I showed you in the
pictures. Take requirement, draw a
picture and then hand it over and say
okay bye. I have to go to um somewhere
else. You have to stick with the plan.
You have to make sure whether your plan
is working. This is an initial plan. So
this as well something that I've seen
people make plans and disappear and
that's it. No, if you are the architect
of my house, I want to still discuss
with you things until the whole house is
built. You are responsible for the plan,
right?
So those are some let's say bad things
that you might do. Again, don't be the
tool guy. Don't only talk about theory.
You have to do your own projects. Don't
be the overspender. Yeah, you have to
know the limits of the companies before
uh making a picture. And uh don't make
things over yeah killed um
and as well um yeah if things change you
have to change as well your architecture
you cannot stick with it. Now
um I'm going to say
we're going to go to the next point
where um I'm going to tell you a little
bit
maybe I'm going to do it with a sketch
show that it is not that boring for you.
I think with the visuals it's going to
be more interesting for you right. So
let me just see how we going to do this
now. I think I'm going to go and sketch
things.
So
we have those no skies but we are done
with this. Let's go and grab something
else.
Yeah.
Now
let's go back. So I'm I'm going to give
you maybe a story on what I'm going to
do if I join a company as a data
architect. Let's say I got
uh hired at a company. Now again I
stopped making YouTube videos and
YouTube stuff and I said you know what I
would like to become a data architect in
a company. how I'm going to do this like
like what are the my main activities
like what I'm going to do right so I'm
going to take in this story I I'm not
really prepared for those stuff but I
think it's better to make sketch about
it
um is a data architect a boring job um I
don't think so my friends
data architect it is I'm I'm going to
say a manager it is a boring job But a
data architect it is fun because there
is a lot of communications.
Um what is the primary
roles and responsibility of data
architect? Um this is what I'm trying to
explain now. [laughter]
So uh if you go through through this
with me you're going to understand what
is exactly uh what we do now.
Okay. This is Bar. [laughter]
I joined a new company. Okay. Uh let me
just see whether you can see my screen.
Yes, I can see you can see it, right? Um
so now I joined a new company, right?
This is me. Now the first thing that I
would do is that I would not
Yeah, I'm speaking now about an
architect
trying to put the scenario. I am not a
data engineer. Okay. Now I'm joining as
a data architect here maybe in a
department something like this or maybe
principal I don't know like in between.
Yeah. So I'm not I'm not implementing
anything. I'm just um
I'm just principal data architect or or
um dedicated one. Right. So now the
first thing that I would do is that I
would never start
doing anything at the start. So at the
start it's all about
so this is the phase one uh I would not
go and start um yeah building anything
or drawing anything I would just
talk to people. So this is the first
thing that I would do and we have many
different people right in companies. So
uh let me just grab something like this
guy here. This person let's say those
are the technical people. All right. So
uh sorry this is the business.
Business uh means with the stakeholders
maybe the ex yeah process experts maybe
yeah people that are doing the business
right now. What else do we have? We have
we have the tech guys. Uh let me just
grab
a girl. [laughter]
So uh this is let's say it. All right.
Or uh no not not it data engineers.
So those are the data engineers.
Um and let's get a manager or something
like that.
So uh this is a manager
and oh yeah so this is IT tech whatever
you want to call it data engineer
whatever yeah those people build things
now
in phase one what I'm going to do um
depend of course in the scenario I would
not go immediately and start talking to
the data engineers as a data architect I
would leave it for before so in the
phase one I just want to understand what
is going on. So I have no idea what is
going on in the company. So first of all
I'm going to decide to talk to the
business.
So I would like to talk to the business
understand what they do actually uh
understand their processes understand um
why do they need data what they do with
the data like if I give them an excel of
data or maybe access to database what
they do with it how they work with the
data do they have like PowerBI reports
are they doing some I don't know yeah
are they using some yeah maybe AI tools
uh or just using Excel so I would like
to understand how they are working with
the data and understand the business
process like how the business is
running. So I'm going to pick those guys
first. Yeah. So talk to the business.
Now after that um what I missed is
actually
way more important than talking to a
manager or to data engineer. I'm going
to speak with the source of the data. So
data source owners. Okay. So
first I understand the business. I
understand the processes and after that
I go to the data sources. Those people
are responsible of generating uh the
data. So I'm going to speak uh yeah with
them about yeah how do you store the
data? How do you give the data? What are
um
uh like what are the different
possibilities to get data from you the
size of the data? How do you store it?
Do you have some documentations and
stuff like that? So I talked to the
sources of the data that is needed for
the company. This is very important in
order to understand how the data is
generated, how the data is stored and
how they can give me the data. Now after
that I might go to the tech people and
start asking what do we have already in
the company? How do you manage?
Oh, I look at this. I have here really
nice [laughter]
images. Maybe I'm going to put this
instead of this business user. So those
are the business users. No. So um
I'm going to go to the data engineers to
the IT to the tech and start asking them
how they manage their data. Uh do they
have data warehouse? Do do they have
data lakehouse lakeouses data lake? What
are the pains? Uh how long it takes to
load the data or maybe they don't have
anything. So it depends really on the
situation what they have really at the
company and after that I'm going to
start talking to the manager understand
things like
um yeah maybe the size of the teams what
is the budget that we have um how much
money we have to for the projects the
limitations and stuff like that so as
you can see I'm jumping between
different teams and try to understand
from them the current situation I want
to understand
the current situation of the company as
a data architect without this I have no
idea I cannot suggest anything I cannot
make any pictures or or stuff like that
so I need to talk I need to like
interview and ask questions and each of
group of course needs different set of
questions again the business what they
do with the data why they need it what
are the pains data sources how they
generate the data uh the managers it's
about the timelines the budget and the
data engineers what they have currently
now once I have the big picture I will
start drawing the first architecture but
this is my friends not
the architecture of uh let's say the
yeah the goal architecture I'm just
going to draw the current architecture
as a picture to say hey we have data
warehouse house. Uh then we have here
PowerBI reports whatever. Yeah. And here
we have another data warehouse data
warehouse 2. Uh this is on the cloud.
The first data warehouse maybe on the
onrem.
So I start drawing let's say um yeah the
current architecture
as it is
and here maybe the sources whatever like
I'm I'm not just going to draw something
I just want to let you know that uh I
just want to understand the current big
picture. Now this is the first delivery
that I'm going to do as a data architect
is to make it clear for everyone
how the world looks like and I'm going
to make a list of pain points.
So I'm just going to say okay we have
this and that and I'm I'll just make a
list of all bad things that I think
um we should fix. And here you have to
be very very very careful because if you
are a new guy I would not go and do
fingerpointing to others. Okay.
I would not go and start talking ah you
know what you have done bad job and to
the others everything is bad and start
criticizing yeah people you should not
you should not do that because everyone
going to hate you and no one going to
listen to you afterward. you just be to
be um very careful how do you criticize
people or let's say how do you show the
current painoint don't criticize don't
do fingerpointing
just show the current yeah picture about
yeah the company and then say
this is maybe yeah not good because and
always you have to say because why yeah
to have two data warehouses maybe makes
no sense and stuff like
So this is a big face where I show them
the current situation of the company and
a list of all pain points and with that
I gain let's say some trust yeah from
the companies that actually I know what
I'm talking about and as well I know
yeah what what are the next steps. Now
what I could do afterwards is that
um
I would start let's say checking the
painoint and check what we can do quick
wins from this.
So I will make like suggestions but not
big sug suggestions it's going to be
like the big wins for example I don't
know yeah maybe as I'm analyzing the
data one of those platforms here the
maybe onrem data warehouse I found
something really bad about the pipelines
and I just say hey you know what if you
add indexes or I don't know yeah if you
change this and that you will be
optimizing your data warehouse so I
would not think about the full big
picture I'm going to go and grab some
quick wins. Now at the same time
um after that I have to make
this is what expected from me to make
something called the target
architecture.
So
and this is the biggest uh biggest task
that's yeah I will be doing is to build
the goal the target the suggestions okay
so um I'm going to start first with the
quick wins and with the quick wins why I
like to do quick wins the data architect
because I gain trust I'm going to gain
trust from yeah from the managers from
the engineers and I'm going to spend
some times on it yeah but I will not
spend let's say years just doing quick
on wins just just since I have done a
big review I would like to get some yeah
some stuff that are sorted now a target
architecture this is going to be a big
one
now I'm going to start building a second
uh architecture but again it will not be
super detailed one it's going to be uh
let me just here add picture here maybe
targets
and this is here the current.
Now after I have understood of course
the current situation of the company and
stuff like that the tools the money and
all those stuff I start maybe drawing
completely a new picture about how we
going to solve all those pain points. So
what we're going to do is that I'm going
to draw something new but not super
detailed. Okay. So I'm going to say okay
we have here um maybe uh source one
uh source two let me just say here
source two and how about to make I don't
know I just like how to make a lakehouse
data lake house yeah and with that we
are consolidating those two data
warehouses inside a new one and we like
save some monies and stuff like that and
we put I don't know a PowerBI on top of
it. So I don't try to build the whole
thing. Yeah, I build the whole
architecture in one go. I would like to
make small thing. Now what I do after
once I have like something I start
discussing this target architecture
um with the others.
So I'm going to take this and start
talking to people about it. Hey, look at
this. I have here target architecture.
uh what do you think about it? Yeah. So
maybe start with the sources I'm going
to say. So I'm going to start with so
say I'm I'm having this idea about uh
building this architecture. What do you
think about it? They're going to start
correcting me say hey Barry look um yeah
our source is not uh yeah not like you
think you should make yeah you should go
and do incremental load. Maybe you have
to go and use our APIs and uh you start
uh saying okay maybe um yeah once a day
so one day load and it's not like you
think yeah so I start adding more things
on top of the picture okay it is an API
it is only one day and after I go to the
second team they say hey we have
actually CFKA do you know that you can
get my data through CFKA and we have a
real stream
and if you want to go and get our full
uh let's say uh yeah old data we have
some cold storage. So we have here like
for example
um yeah some cold data storage impl
I'm I'm not trying I'm just showing you
here story okay so it's not super
detailed now so with this I have more
informations and my picture is growing
over the time right so
I know I know about the sources after
that as I start speaking working with
the business they say hey bar you know
what only PowerBI is not enough we
actually really need to add AI use cases
how about to go and add AI how about we
would like to get some I don't know yeah
some self-service
self service yeah uh stuff like BI so
with that after I show them this picture
I can refine my plan yeah so I can
understand exactly what is going on.
Now, after I go maybe to the manager,
yeah, or maybe to the engineers,
whatever, yeah, they say, you know what,
we could gain get you an access to data
bricks. So, we can go and add
uh we could yeah, we can have a have a
budget to work with the data bricks. So,
I start like maybe um understanding the
budget and start bringing uh some
solutions like maybe snowflake here. Do
I have snowflake? Yeah. So we have a
money in order to go to the cloud and to
pay as we go.
So with that I start like adding more
options. Yeah. And here as I take talk
to the data engineers and they say you
know what um we could speak about having
streaming or let's say we could have
like pi spark and we're working with pi
spark and over the time my friends my
picture gets bigger and bigger and
bigger and it's always the same picture
but it's just like getting bigger over
the time as I talk to people and
understand now
my target picture is getting more here.
And now of course depends on the
company. Yeah. Um
depend on the managers and the levels
and stuff like that. I start showing
maybe version one version two of this
like um yeah just just for fun. Okay. So
I'm going to say how about to build the
lakehouse using data bricks. And here
other option we could really build SQL
warehouse.
And I start saying uh you know what we
don't have in the company like a lot of
engineers. We have a lot of people that
actually have uh only SQL skills going
to uh let's say spark engines and stuff
like that. It is an overkill. So I start
like making different versions of my
target picture
and depends now who would like to
discuss this with me.
we start making decision for the for the
company. Huh. So this is me the data
architect. Now it could yeah could be
like over the time join uh the data
officers of course.
So data officer
and join people like uh the security
officers
and all those people would like to hear
from me why I am suggesting those
architectures. So they are all people
that I need to justify my solution and
why I recommend this. Okay.
So there is a lot of communications now
going to be with managers with all those
people explaining those stuff and once I
have the feeling okay this is not
working. Yeah. One of them I'm going to
like remove one of those solutions and
just stick with one. Yeah. And once I
get approval,
do we have here? Yes or something.
Okay. I don't have like something for
this or this one here.
Okay. [laughter]
So, once they all say maybe I I'm going
to make them green. Oh, no. All right.
So once they all say okay I'm okay with
your plan I'm okay with your plan I get
approved by all those people what's
going to happen that
um the architecture going to be decided
right so this is the target architecture
that we will be implementing in the
company for maybe specific department
for the specific team. So now once
everyone accepted yeah the target
architecture what going to happen that
it is time for implementations right so
now my next step is that once everyone
approves
I have to go and hand this over to the
developers right so I'm going to say
this is the old word and now our job is
to migrate great to do data migrations
from the old world to the new world. So
now all what I have to do is
to mentor the data engineers to mentor
the developers on how to do this
migration.
So
um as I said this could be a bad thing
if I just like for example um yeah tell
them okay you know what I got it this is
the plan we are doing it exactly like
this and now it is your job to yeah
implement and then I disappear right
so this is the worst that I could do
that I just disappear from the picture
and the data engineers have to do this
okay
So usually we don't do that. The data
architect should stay and mentor
especially in the initial phase on how
to do the migration. You have to help
them in order to do the whole yeah at
least the first big steps and you have
to make sure that actually your plan is
working and you have to mentor them.
Okay. And if you see something is not
working my friends
you really have to change things. Like
for example, I don't know yeah the team
is not able to do I don't know spark
development or let's say things are
getting very expensive you have to keep
reporting
yeah to the teams to the managers that
actually things are not working and we
have to change things okay so maybe the
self-service is not working maybe you
are not able to connect the storage so
you keep adjusting your target plan your
target architecture until it works So
it's something living and my friends
this one here it's going to live for
really long time. So this target
architecture it will be yeah as as I
told you mine lived for around five
years at the company and it was always
the same picture that got grows and we
added each year more more things to it.
At the start my architecture was with
data factory and um we have done only uh
a modern or let's say a cloud data
warehouse. This is the first things I
have done and then over the time I found
myself I'm building a data lakehouse
and over the time I found myself I am
building a data product. So this
architecture keep evolving my friends
and keep changing with the demands and
it's not something that you do and you
just leave. So um this is I'm going to
say comes of course the question is what
is the next step? Should I stay with the
engineer? Should I develop this with
them? Well, it's going to be perfect if
you don't develop it in yourself. you
leave it for the data engineers or the
next thing you go I'm going to go to the
managers and find maybe
other departments or other teams that
are let's say struggling with maybe the
architecture or maybe I'm going to go
with the yeah with the company and say
you know what I would like to roll this
to another department yeah maybe another
domains in the company in order uh yeah
to help them as well so your job will
not be end up with making only one let's
say something one for one team you will
be jumping between teams let me just
show you here
yeah so you'll be working with multiple
teams with multiple managers and you
will be developing this target
architecture for different people yeah
and over the time you might get the
inter lab the principal data architects
where you're going to really sit down
with the top managers and top people and
start building the enterprise data
architecture for the whole company. So
this is my mindset my friends. This is
how I would do it if I get hired now or
I got like u I go back to uh doing data
jobs. This is exactly what how I'm going
to do it. Those are the steps as a data
architect. I hope this makes a little
bit sense for you. I hope that um uh
yeah you have some understanding what
this role means. And I totally agree
with you that we can take break because
next we're going to switch about I
believe we're going to speak about
theory and yeah some data concepts. So
we're going to start again what is a
data warehouse lakehouse and all those
stuff. But I would like to focus with
you next about now the best trends. What
is a data products? What is a data mesh?
And this is exactly what each company is
requesting from data architect. But not
only that as well from data engineers.
So next going to be very relevant.
We're going to go through the concepts.
So all those data stuff. But I would
like yeah I would like to take a little
break maybe refresh water and I will be
back in yeah 5 minutes or something like
that. I hope you're enjoying the stream
and the stories make sense for you. But
yeah, I will be back in five. I don't
have music, so if you have music, you
can put it in your own. Uh yeah, we are
going a break, my friends.
So I hope that you refreshed
for the next phase.
Yeah,
I am back.
We have some questions like let me see
the most difficult things that I have
met during data learning data skills or
building projects.
Um,
learning data skills
I think the most confusing part for me
was uh learning the data modeling at the
start. I really didn't understand why
exactly
like um yeah especially the data vaults
and the data yeah the third norm form
and stuff like that. So was data
modeling for me really struggling at the
start building the projects
um big struggle is of course I'm going
to say
for me as maybe project lead yeah or as
a developer I don't know from which
perspective I had like many roles
but um I'm going to say the biggest
thing is try to explain your ideas for
business nontechnical people this going
to be your hardest things in your
projects because to be honest as a data
engineers we are always behind the
scenes and people don't understand why
why are we there you know so they if I
am data analyst everyone understand um
I'm making powerbi I am uh getting some
highlights but as a data engineer if I
met nontechnical people it going to be
like I don't know yeah it can be really
hard to explain for them what I do
exactly in the projects, why we are
building data warehouse, why we are
building those stuff, especially if you
have managers that don't have technical
background and they are funding your
projects. Ah, it's going to be really
hard to explain why we are building
those stuff. Maybe they are now in the
session here and they understand now.
But I'm going to say communications with
nontechnical people, especially if you
are a data engineer. Uh, let me just
bring some questions here.
Do the data architects [snorts]
uh design the schema, the data relations
and stuff like that? Yes, my friends. As
you can see, I showed you uh in the
statistics actually many of them are
asking for data moduling skills. Now,
I'm going to say they will not module
the physical world. They might module at
very high level the business objects and
stuff like that. So yes, we might design
data modeling as a data architects. Uh
but at very very high level we will not
go into details. Um I have the feeling
that I am a data engineer, analytical
engineer, a data architect, data
scientist and this and that like
um give me to improve. Okay. Um this is
the thing is that yeah
uh once you enter a company as a data
engineer, you might end up doing I don't
know. Yeah. as a PI developer building
PowerBI reports the job description is
about yeah building pipelines but you
are doing PowerBI reports or you are
doing as a data scientist you are doing
data engineering stuff the thing is it's
still in many companies it is not clear
definitions about those roles people
some yeah maybe some I don't know yeah
uh companies want to make datadriven
things but they still struggling
understanding those roles and how they
hunt for people and how they what they
need exactly. So you're going to find a
lot of confusion. They're going to make
data teams and at the ends the yeah the
business people just need few PowerBI
reports and that's it. So yeah it is
confusing. I saw at least three data
scientists they learned everything about
data science. Yeah they have
certificates they went to the university
and at the end they do data engineering
stuff. So yes, you're going to learn all
those stuff, but you have to adapt. Even
if you are data architect like even if I
got hired now as a data architect
[snorts] and the job is requesting from
me to do some data engineering stuff, I
don't mind. Yeah, I'm going to do those
stuff. I might do the first project then
hand over and those stuff. So um yeah,
this is about the data world. It is not
there is no clear separations. There's
yeah people just do some yeah some job
descriptions they hire people and then
at the end they request you to do other
things uh but I think over the time
things going to be more yeah there will
be more understanding as I got hired I
was doing everything really everything
project leads data engineering data
analyst data architect all those stuff
but yeah over the time people uh yeah
get more mature and they start
understanding uh those roles but you we
need still some time Um
I explained what are the differences
between a data architect and principle
one you can go back in the recording now
I will go back to the topics I'm going
to say so with that you have now some
understanding right what is a data
architect it is about communications it
is about understanding the requirements
it is about making a plan and you can do
all those stuff only after you have some
experience you cannot Not as an entry
job just learn data ar architects and
architectures those concept and enter a
company you need some experience and
it's all about communications understand
requirements making a plan communicating
pack uh convincing people about your
plan you have to make tra understand the
tradeoff between what is the data lake
what is the data warehouse and what is
the trade-off understand the business
and what could be the best fit so it is
yeah it is a lot of skills I'm going to
say and um if you master it and if you
learn it or let's say start as a data
engineer and you start thinking like an
architect you're going to get an amazing
career believe me this is going to be um
companies are hungry yeah for those
stuff. So if you if you start bringing
this mindset as a data engineer or
analyst and you start drawing pictures
and you start uh building those stuff
and start having a plan discussing trade
off understand the requirements and
stuff like that um yeah then you are
good architects but it needs years
um yes the record is going to be alive
now with this you have understanding
about the mindset I gave you let's say
uh what are the mistakes and how I think
if I got now hired, what could be the
phases, the steps and all those stuff.
Now next what we can do is I'm going to
show you again those statistics
and there is like two options that you
could do. I'm thinking about it
actually.
Um again those are the data concepts
that are requested from you to have
knowledge about it. what is data
modeling, data governance, data uh
management, data warehouse, ETL, data
integration and those stuff, right? So
those are all concepts and to be honest
all of those stuff are very relevant for
you whether you are an architect or an
engineer. I could maybe next time I
should brought here the data analyst as
well but believe me they're going to ask
you to have some of those skills. So now
what I could do is to deep dive into the
core concepts that we could have like
for example
the data warehouse lakehouse lake and
the data lake and then start talking
about I think there is something very
important is the data products
uh it's over here the data products and
the data mesh
let me go back to the platforms yeah the
data mesh I think this is something
that's we don't have a lot of content
about it right I think many of you knows
what is a data lake house what is a data
warehouse but you have some yeah maybe
there's like some content about the
those two things I would like to maybe
deep dive into them so now I'm going to
go through few concepts and we're going
to start talking about yeah a few of
those stuff of course sketching
understanding I will not develop
anything now on live and those are basic
understanding theory for you in order to
work maybe as a data architect or
engineering and maybe at the end I'm
going to bring like one big picture
about how to draw a data architecture.
Okay. So
um I'm going to say we're going to go
through those stuff. Let's go. Let me go
through again here. Now I would like you
first to understand maybe quickly. am um
let me see whether you can see my screen
you can see it all right so now the
first concept that you have to
understand my friends everyone you
should understand what is an ETL I know
many of you knows this but
maybe I'm going to open your eyes on it
better so now the whole thing is we have
a source and we have a target this is
always like this a data architect our
architecture
you have sources you have your target
and you have consumers now of course we
have to understand how to bring this
data from the sources to the target now
the first thing we're going to write a
script my friends that we're going to
call it extraction
uh where it could be yeah by the way it
could be in SQL as well it could be in
Python whatever the language all what we
have to do is first we have to write
scripts to extract the data that we
have. So we are just extracting the data
from the source but it's not yet loaded
right. So it's just extraction.
Now after we extract the data now here
you have two options either you're going
to load it in the target or you say wait
I would like to change few things on the
fly. So we're going to say I would like
to do transformation.
So the extraction did this. Now the
transformation going to pick few
informations and manipulate it. So for
example here
uh I don't know instead of the couple
case we're going to have lower case.
This is the transformation. So now the
data looks different than the source
right I have done data manipulation. I
have done transformation.
Now after that the data is ready right?
So what we're going to do is we're going
to write another script and we're going
to call it
loading
and it has one job is to take this data
and load it to the target. I'm loading
the data.
This is just the basic concept, right?
So this is exactly what do we mean with
the ETL.
I extract, I transform and then load to
my target. The target could be again,
yeah, it could be data warehouse, a
lakehouse, a lake, whatever. Yeah, it
could be anything. Even another database
and those scripts, it could be anything.
Yeah, it could be SQL, even PowerBI. By
the way, if you go to PowerBI and do
Power Query, you might do an ETL. So,
this is just a process, a concept and it
is not like only thing that you can do
in SQL, Python or data bricks. It is
generic concept. Now this I'm going to
say that was the first way we have done
things. Then over the time we got
customers
where they said you know what uh let me
just say bring
so data or let's say to be more modern
AI engineers
and they said hey what are you doing
actually this is not what I need this
transformation that you have done to the
data is not good for my AI
My AI want to understand exactly how how
was the original data from the source.
Now I cannot go and run the AI in the
source. I would like really to see in
the target the original data. Don't do
your transformations on top of my data.
So that's why over the time we found out
actually ETL it is something not that
good because on the target in many
scenarios data scientists AI engineers
we would like to have the raw data
that's why we stop doing the ATL and now
we do something called ELT
I think you understand what I mean but
it's only for people that's yeah first
time here
so ELT
we
We're going to do the same thing but a
little bit differently.
We will remove
the transformation in the middle and we
will just postpone it and do it later.
So we're going to do extraction.
Let me just remove this as well. So I
would like to extract the data load it.
Yeah. And then directly load it in the
source. Don't do any transformations.
So with that the AI engineer is going to
be happy right?
So they can say, "Ah, right. I have my
data." But of course, ah, we need, let
me check where is our data scientist.
Do we have I'm going to bring her. She's
our data scientist.
Uh, no data analyst. Sorry. Data
analyst.
But of course, data analyst going to
say, "Hey, um, yeah, I would like to
have the data transformed. It's not
prepared. I cannot use it for my
PowerBI. That's why we data engineers
we're going to go and build
transformation. Let me just get this
copy.
Um after
we load the data one to one. So with
that we have two copy of the data.
So after it lands I make the
transformations. And this is my friends
what we call ELT extraction loading and
transformation. And that's all because
in our target architecture we going to
need different versions of the data for
different type of people. And this is
the whole story to be honest. [laughter]
Once we go to the data m the data
product it's always like this over the
time things gets more complicated. Now
this is again um let's say a concept.
Okay this is a process. Now in reality
things looks like this. If I take uh
maybe this one here, in reality, if you
build the architecture, you're going to
end up seeing this picture that you have
multiple layers. So they have the source
and then you have layer one
and you have then layer two, layer
three, layer four depends on on what
what you are doing. So you're going to
have a lot of layers and between each
layers you will be end up doing
again where is yeah here you'll be doing
this process. So at the start you might
do e I extract and load then after that
I do TL
I transform and load it somewhere else
and then over the time you can find
yourself doing this.
Yeah. So you're going to end up
making ELTL whatever. Yeah. And maybe
another system going to come to you back
to you and say I'm going to do an ETL
from you
or EL from you and then they continue.
So this is in real world things get
crazy. Yeah. So this is exactly what we
mean with the ETL. But to be honest, I
don't use it a lot. I don't uh like in
the architecture I don't have to say uh
now I'm doing TL or ETL it is just the
process name people say uh we are doing
ETL process that's means I'm extracting
the data transforming it and loading it
now with this you understand yeah what
those words means and how the real words
looks like so this is the basic concept
that you have to understand about yeah
how we move data and what we do with the
data between different
Now um
now we're going to go to the real data
architectures. Now um what do we have
here? So in the strategy you can see or
where was it platforms. Now you can see
they are asking for things like um data
warehouse lakehouse data lake. they
expect you to have those understanding
and as you can see still dominating the
data warehouse
um and that's because my friends many
companies need just the data warehouse
they don't need extra stuff I know lake
houses is more advanced and stuff like
that but we have many middlesiz
companies or small companies they don't
need this big lakeous it's very dramatic
of course so that's why if you can that
do data warehousing then you're going to
cover let's say many many companies with
us but now I would like to take you
through those three and then extend it
to the data mesh and the data products
because it is like the next levels now
let's go through it one by one so with
this we covered the as I said the
now let me see where I'm start so things
don't get crazy
uh I'm going to take this frame again.
So I'm going to start again here on
white paper.
So what is the issue my friends? Why do
we have those systems?
So we have always
source layer.
Let's always start with the sources.
Source. Yeah, you're going to find a lot
of typo.
Um so we're going to have like source
one, source two and usually they have
databases. Okay, this is the classical
things. Most of the sources are
databases.
Um and now what happens at that? So
things start like this. Maybe you have I
don't know three databases.
Now we get those people where are they?
they are the data analysts
and
they like to do reports using PowerBI or
whatever. Okay.
Now the thing is those sources their
main job is to do to um to build
applications
they store the data behind uh I'm just
searching whether I have here an icon of
application.
Do I have something?
I don't have really an icon for
application.
Application. No app.
[snorts] Oh, whatever. So, I'm going to
take random thing. An app.
Now, those are transactional systems
that they just focus on the apps. Okay?
They just store the data. They have
transactions left and right. They are uh
OTP systems.
Now that was the main idea. You have a
website and you have a database behind
it. And this is what the companies do.
Yeah. Now suddenly over the time we have
those analysts they say you know what
the business they have questions about I
don't know they are asking how much uh
sales do we have what are the pain point
what are like how much money we made
like compare the last year with this
year. So they hire this data analyst and
they have to yeah analyze the data
and they go to the same database and
they start doing that. Now this might be
okay if you have like one but over the
time if you start having a lot of
analysts and a lot of people doing big
SQL queries on top of those my friends
those database is going to be very slow
and if you have a slow database then
you're going to have a slow application.
So
uh this going to be a big issue if you
let let those analyst go to the
databases and start doing big SQL
queries. They going to make everything
slow. And by the way those analysts
since they access the row data they
going to have as well bad numbers to the
business. So your business uh let me see
I had like some business people here.
Where are they?
Where are they? uh those so those are
the business people and they're going to
get wrong numbers from those three
analysts. So this is the old word. Okay,
this is something that um yeah works
maybe if you have one analyst and one
Excel but if the company gets a little
bit bigger this will not work. That's
why we say stop. We don't do this. We
have to build a data platform. Now
uh a data platform it's like this.
Usually we say
let me just prepare those stuff.
[snorts] We say okay go away you and
your PowerBI reports and leave us alone.
Now we're going to get this engineer ah
this engineer
ideally with a data architect
that has some data architect skills and
we say you know what we're going to go
and extract one copy of the data and
build the data warehouse.
Now we're going to extract all those
stuff once using the ETL. Again we have
this ETL process
and we build something like a pipeline.
Yeah, we put here pipeline and
how I'm going to do the ATL ATL. So let
me just make this
E.
Uh is it big enough? Yeah. Okay. So E T
L.
So ETL
I do the ETL into a warehouse. Let me
just add data warehouse.
And um yeah, there going to be like
three layers inside the warehouse and
stuff like that.
Uh you know what? Let's just do it
correctly.
I'm going to do it correctly. So data
warehouse usually have something called
stage.
then a car
and then march. Yeah.
So we're going to have like three three
steps
and we do the ATL and the mart going to
be my friends. So the whole thing is the
data warehouse system and from the mart
after we do the ATL and stuff like that
only then join our data analysts.
So,
so the data analyst going to start using
the marts. Usually in the marts we have
star schema. Star schema.
Data model. Yeah.
Um usually we have here inside like a
data model like this and they access it
and start building the PowerBI reports
or whatever analyszis they have. And now
since we have done the ETL only once the
numbers going to be better from those
reports.
Now the whole thing as I said this is
something we call a data warehouse. Now
data warehouse there are like two ways
or let's say two names for it either if
you build it inside I don't know yeah
the onrem
onrem. Yeah, this is onrem. Uh on-prem
means
uh the company has their own um servers,
their own data center. They buy the
servers, they buy I don't know yeah
those big super machines and they
connected with the networks in the
company and it belongs to the company.
So that means the data engineer going to
go and yeah maybe buy server or uh
request for a server from the from the
company and starts installing let's say
the warehouse inside it. This is what we
call classical warehouse,
classical data warehouse. I'm going to
say most of the projects they do this
and usually we do this inside Yeah. Do
we have a skill warehouse here? SQL
Server.
No, we don't have SQL server. And
usually we do it like um Yeah, in SQL
Server or in Oracle.
Uh let me just close the door. Just a
second. [laughter] Okay,
there are some noises outside.
So
um so yeah so they do it inside SQL
server. By the way, I have we have done
projects in the channel about how to
build such a um yeah classical or yeah
SQL data warehouse and um usually you
can do it completely in SQL
um you could use other tools like I
don't know for the ATL like talent or
Informatica and those classical things
but this is usually the classical things
that you have done for 30 years now
over the time you might say let's go
modern more modern
and this is what I've done uh one
project at Mercedes-Benz I transformed
their warehouse from the SQL server to
the cloud so now we put it in the cloud
and we use tools I don't know yeah like
data factory or uh Azure if you are
doing it in Azure and stuff like that so
you move your SQL warehouse from the
on-prem to the cloud and this is what we
call like in the theory a modern data
warehouse and that's all because you are
using the cloud. So if you hear about
okay now we are doing a modern data
warehouse that means this company is
just moving their warehouse from the
on-prem to the cloud. Of course, you can
do it. Yeah. Uh you can even do it in in
data bricks. Yeah. Or fabric or
snowflake, whatever the tool. Yeah. But
the main idea is just um moving the data
from the sources to the consumers and I
put it like into three layers. Now I
will explain more about those three
layers because I would not not now focus
on the warehouse itself.
Um
now once the company gets a little bit
bigger that means they get more
sophisticated they get more advanced
systems and stuff like that.
If you go to the sources let me just
group this
group. Now if you go to the sources they
will start saying you know what I will
not give you an access to my SQL
database because now we offer the data
only through Kafka. We are doing data
streaming. Okay. So,
so they're going to uh tell you
let me just remove those stuff. In order
to access my data, you have to go to
stream to real KFKA and this is of
course a big issue for you or they start
offering their data through APIs and
they say hey I no one access my
database.
We offer you only APIs.
Yeah. And they start you're going to
start seeing uh sophisticated Yeah.
Let's say sources or maybe they going to
start giving you those unstructured data
or semiructured data like in JSON. Yeah.
Or Yeah. Maybe you're going to start
like maybe loading some images. That
means as the companies Yeah. get more
sophisticated, you're going to get more
advanced source systems. So your source
layer getting really hard for you as a
data engineer. Now if you just stick
with a warehouse where you have only
database this going to be nightmare to
connect
and at the same time not only your
sources are changes
your consumers as well I'm I'm going to
call them consumers here.
So consumers,
your consumers as well becoming more
advanced. So the com the company is
going to start hiring maybe an AI
engineer
or let me see here whether I have
another
crazy figures. Yeah, maybe bring this
one back.
or they going to bring a data scientist.
So you're going to start having
different type of consumers and even
guess what even the business users going
to come to you and start saying hey I'm
really interested as well in the data
warehouse. So those people if they start
joining the consumers your data
warehouse concept going to fail. So that
means over the time if the company grows
your
sources are getting more complicated and
um the consumers are getting more
complicated. That's why
um
yeah by the way why the data engineers
and data scientists cannot work with
this because my friends you offer only
star schema at the end. you offer only
this star schema where you have the fact
and dimensions and no one can consume
this. So the data scientist cannot work
with this. The AI engineer the same
thing cannot consume your um your marks.
So they going to say I need the data as
it is and this is all because you are my
friends are doing those transformations.
It's all because of the transformations.
So it's all because the engineer is
deciding how to change the data. Yeah.
And we changed the data because of the
analysts. We would like to clean up the
data. We would like to prepare it in a
shape where the data analyst can
immediately start doing their analysis
on top of data. But this transformation
that we are doing inside our pipelines
in the warehouse,
it is destroying the data for other
roles. Okay. So the other roles are not
able to consume it because of this.
So that's why data warehouse cannot work
for data scientists, AI engineers, for
yeah let's say advanced uh source
systems that are not structured in the
tables and and databases.
That's why um we moved to another
concept which is
now this is the big movement to
something called um the data lake.
So in data lake what we have done. So
this is the data lake.
In data league the data engineers gave
up and say you know what since you
really need the row data I would not do
it I would not do the t I would not
transfer anything
and you have to do it in your own so
that means the data engineers
starts yeah let me just make it like
this uh I think I have like shape for
data lake just second
uh something like this and they said you
know what
I'm going to bring everything
extract it from the sources
store it in uh let's say uh sheep
storage
like this so I will start throwing
everything I can touch here
and put it inside a data lake but I
would never change
So I would not transfer anything. I just
do this. By the way, I've done this in
uh push one of my projects. Of course,
it requires uh more skills. You have to
start coding. Not SQL is not enough. You
have to do Python. You have to learn
about how to do things in Hadoop, maybe
Spark. So you going to get let's say
more advanced on how to do this e alone
the eel but the storage going to be very
very cheap because you are not storing
in databases you are just making the
lake now what happens that AI engineers
were happy about it
data scientists as well happy
but what happened is that
those analysts
they have to do the T they have to go
and build their own transformations.
They have only
let's say
like this.
So those analysts now have the task to
do the T.
All right. So and guess what? This is
one of the worst things that you could
do. [laughter]
That's why data lake concept did die.
And I'm going to say still the data
warehouse is is more stable than
building a data leak. It's all because
we said
um yeah I'm going to give you the road
data as it is very fast very cheap but
you have to do the rest. So and uh this
is very expensive because sometimes if
you have sophisticated source systems
this might takes a lot of time. This
might takes I don't know I I've seen one
source to transform it. It took around 3
months. So, so this can take really long
time until you prepare the data.
Preparing the data going to be
nightmare. And every single new
data analyst join the data lake. They
have to do the transformation from the
scratch.
So this is deadly for data analysts. And
I'm speaking about transforming not like
for example cleaning up the nulls,
removing things like simple things. I'm
speaking about sophisticated things.
They have to learn how to go with the
JSON formats. They have to learn how to
transform the format that you are
getting from Kfka from APIs. Yeah. So it
is highly yeah complicated formats that
you are saying for the analyst you have
to take care of doing yeah the consuming
of the cafka topics I'm just going to
take the data as it is and put it inside
the data lake that's why for those
people they were happy about it the data
scientists engineer the data analysts it
was catastrophic and to be honest it was
not working I I've seen this After
building the lake,
after building the lake, we trans yeah
we I don't know we spent maybe few
months and then we have seen the
struggle that happens to the data
analyst and we went back to the data
warehouse. I don't believe really that
you could do data lake in uh big
companies. You should do something else.
either build a normal data warehouse or
I'm going to of course take you to the
next solution which is the lake house
but um you know
I I still think really the data lake is
amazing for AI
because AI I'm I'm yeah I'm doing a lot
of projects now like on my own the the
more row the data is the better the
result is so since we do the human the
transformations
I see that yeah we are restricting so
much AI use cases so that's why since
now we are transitioning yeah to AI
maybe the data league going to get yeah
bigger and more important but for now
most of companies they want reports most
of companies they want to know what is
the status they want to do powerbi
projects they want to analyze the data
and you cannot go and build a data lake
and this is of course again we come back
to the architect role All you have to
understand as an architect
you have to understand your sources and
your consumers.
If you see you have a lot of data
analyst and you have only like I don't
know one small use case about AI and you
suggest data leak you're going to like
destroy the whole I don't know setup.
Yeah. That's why you have to understand
as a data architect the level of
complexity of the sources, the level of
complexity of the consumers and suggest
an architecture. So you cannot go with
this setup. We have a lot of analysts
and say hey I know we can build a data
lake which is modern and cool. Who
builds data warehouse right? Yeah I
don't know it's only old style things.
[laughter]
So uh and then you destroy all the
consumers. Yeah. So that's why you have
to understand. Now my belief in big
companies it is little bit getting
straightforwards where we are merging
those two together. This is uh something
um that's a um data. Yeah. Let let me
let me just tell you something. Now
the warehouse it's like theory came
maybe from universities and from people
that do concepts and stuff like that. It
was not a vendor. A vendor comes and say
hey let's uh let's go and build a
warehouse. Same thing for data lake. It
was theory first. People discussed it.
People wrote books about it. [snorts] So
people as well discussed it in the
universities and stuff. But now this is
the first time a vendor is like uh
suggesting
uh let's say the next phase which is one
of them is data bricks.
Data bricks came and say you know what
uh let's go and merge those two together
into one system called the data lake
house. So, what you're going to do, let
me just grab this image.
Just prepare it a little bit.
Uh, we're going to get there warehouse.
So,
so now they said okay we have modern
data warehouses and we have the data
links and the idea is very simple.
Let me just remove.
So the idea is very simple
is to convert the data warehouse into
yeah into a data lake but we still
maintain those organization of the
stages. So that means
yeah the data is still cheap to store
but still you have to do the layering
you still have to do the ETL.
So the data engineers sadly
[laughter]
got back this big T again. So
the data engine should should do again
the transformation
but they do the E first. So E L and then
T. Yeah.
So now
they have again this task where they
have to do the T again.
Uh but they do it like afterwards and
data brick says or let's say in the
medallion architecture they said okay
this is going to be a bronze
silver
and gold
and they gave it a name called
data lakehouse
of course everything in the cloud you
can put it in either in Azure or AWS and
let me just bring few
this.
[snorts] So they said you can do both.
You can still organize your data and you
can still do the transformation
and
then you offer the data for different
people from your lakehouse. Like for
example your consumers the data analyst
going to be happy again because finally
they are getting
the transformed data. So the T is back
to the engineers and the analysts can be
faster and the data scientists as well
are happy with this because they still
can access the bronze and silver.
Same thing for the AI engineers.
So So that means my friends
now
Let me just move this
now. Um,
with this we have like different I'm
going to say data products. Yeah. Or
different qualities. This is what you
call the medallion architecture where
your data going to be offered into
different qualities and depend on the
user they can access it. And of course
since this is a lake behind the scenes
there's still very cheap storage you can
can you can always go through through
like yeah images you can throw JSON you
can throw CFKA streams inside it and uh
still the row data exist inside and uh
yeah we still have the gold which is
very simple for data analyst. So with
that we fulfilled let's say all
requirements for different type of
consumers and um yeah I'm going to say
this is since 3 years ago now that we
have something called the lakehouse
and this is the first time that I'm
going to say offered by a vendor. Yeah.
And um I see it for now yeah one of the
best architects that architectctors
sorry that you could offer for big
companies because for sure in big
companies you you need you have a lot of
data scientists you have a lot of data
engineers AI engineers data analyst and
uh since as well now data bricks are
bringing more SQL you can offer as well
some access yeah for the business users
in order to consume the gold layer in
very simple way. So they can like uh
yeah consume the gold, consume the
report in PowerBI getting from analyst
and um yeah with that you are combining
the data lake with data warehouse but of
course again the same thing as a data
architect not because data yeah data
lakehouse is the latest concepts it is
the latest let's say yeah modern things
to do you can offer this by default like
you join a company and say, "Hey, you
don't have yet that a lakehouse. This is
all crap. Let's go and
uh let's go and uh yeah, let's go and
build a lakehouse." And at the end, the
company is very small. You know, they
have only one two databases and this
going to be an overkill. This you're
going to do only if you have a lot of
sophisticated sources and I'm going to
say different type of consumers and um
and only if the company can pay for it
of course because to make this yeah you
have to pay a lot of yeah setups and uh
you have to pay as you go you are in the
cloud and you have to understand that is
as well comes with a price building a
ware data warehouse house. Yeah, with
your own servers or maybe Yeah. within
with a small clusters and stuff like
that. Still way cheaper than building a
lakehouse. So now by looking to this I'm
going to say yeah most of yeah um big
companies they going to yeah they're
going to yeah move to this picture.
Yeah. Where they are building a data
lakehouse. midsize companies and small
companies I'm going to say building a
data warehouse modern one or even on the
onrem it is more than enough okay
more than enough because they will they
might not have all those stuff they
might not have all those big
requirements they have only one two
analyst and uh yeah the word is easy
that's why I'm going to say it's always
yeah the job of an architect to
understand what is going on the company
and offer the right solution. I would
say
I would rarely see someone offering a
data leak like I would if I join a
company I would not do this again
[laughter]
after I've done it once I would I would
like just skip it like only to make a
lake for data scientists or a engineers
it is too much maybe
data links comes back once AI gets
stronger and now if you are data analyst
don't hear me Close your eyes and close
your ears. Um, if
over the time this got replaced with AI
and we have pack only AI engineers
and analytics is done completely by AI,
we might go back to data league but I
don't see this yet.
So I still think
uh we need to prepare the data in a
clean way. we have to prepare it in real
ones and um I still think we have to do
the tea. Now, of course, the story
didn't end here.
I'm going to introduce a next level of
complication where this is not more
enough where we're going to speak about
little bit about the data strategy on a
company which is something that you
might hear a lot or it's required from
you to have understanding about the data
strategy of companies as an architect.
Now um I hope that you are enjoying so
far the stream. I'm going to need
another break like maybe five minutes
break and then we're going to speak
about the next levels what comes later
going to be the strategy of the company
and how things going to get out of hand
out control if you just make like lake
houses. Uh but uh for that I'm going to
need a break. So we going to get uh
first of all I hope that you're enjoying
the stream. I don't know I'm not seeing
a lot of chats or interaction from you.
Uh I hope that it is this is not that
boring topic from you. I know this is
not yeah we are not talking about SQL
and stuff like that but um
it is a very relevant topic for you to
hear at least uh even if you are uh new
in data world just a line alone hearing
about those terms if you join a company
you're going to hear about those terms
people are speaking about ETLs data
leakous data leaks and they are start
discussing things with that you
understand those terms and even if you
got interviewed you can answer what is
ETL, what is ELT, what is now we can
speak about the data mesh, the data
products. So you get as a data expert
more into the data strategy of companies
and maybe you start thinking bigger,
right? That's why um it is very relevant
for you.
um it's going to yeah maybe open your
eyes about your career and if you are
planning to become a data architect or
you are already data engineer those
stuff are essential to understand
because if you don't know how to think
like a data architect I yeah you might
do bad job you know uh that's why I
think those all those stuff are relevant
for anyone that is here and we're going
to have five minutes break sadly I don't
have music next time if I uh yeah make
another live stream I'm going to bring
music. That's We're going to have 5
minute break. Be right back.
All right,
I've seen that it is getting late for my
friends from India, right?
I'm really sorry for that. Well, it's
going to be hard to find the perfect
time.
um
like
if I after like I've done some uh some
checks, I think this is the best time
for me to start 5:00 p.m. Otherwise,
it's going to be very early for many
people. So, I hope this is not too late
for some of you or maybe you can do it
in the weekends. Uh but yeah, if you are
going to sleep and you are from India,
then uh sleep well and the record of
course going to stay in YouTube. But if
you're still here, uh you are welcome,
of course, to ask your questions, to um
yeah, to
to stay in the live uh stream. And I'm
going to I'm checking your by the way
your chats. So um I have now
teleprompter and I can read everything.
[laughter] So if you have questions,
feel free to do that. And uh yeah, if
you like this content, don't forget to
support the channel, right?
and yeah to like and share and to uh
show some support. Um let me check few
questions.
Uh yes it's going to be available so I
will not delete anything. It's going to
be in the live section in my channel.
Uh we want data engineering course.
Okay.
So back to data architect and data
architecture. Are you guys enjoying this
so far?
So I keep sketching or do you want me to
give stories? [laughter]
I think sketching is fun, right? So it's
not that uh boring. Now
the thing is um maybe
how I'm going to transition to the next
step because it's going to be big one.
Now the next step is
I'm going to be honest with you. We data
engineers, data analyst, whatever the
name was before we were not that famous
at companies. Okay, the famous people
are the people that are building I don't
know apps they are uh building they are
the software engineers those are the
people that are really famous database
administrations and all those stuff we
were let's say people that are for the
luxury stuff or nice to have topics
and we had like the least uh focus from
budgets and all those stuff because they
think many companies is I don't know the
situation of course in other countries
but I went to many companies here in
Germany but we were always something
nice to have but something happened in
the last four years which is AI of
course um the companies understood that
data is very important to
not only yeah for the analyst in order
to make datadriven decisions but as well
it is very important for the AI and over
the time
they are like let's say more budget for
the data workers like us and more focus
about now we need data engineers we need
to get our data out from the sources and
put it somewhere in order to do more
analyzes more AI stuff on top of it and
let's say there is like yeah the
companies are wake up and understood how
important are we data engineers data
analysts and all those people and We
start getting more attention. Yeah. And
more budget.
That means we had we start getting a lot
of projects. Yeah. I remember this phase
of course as I was a Mercedes-Benz. I
start getting Yeah. my like I had a
warehouse. Yeah. Maybe lakehouse, few
sources, few customers and we are living
our life. [laughter] But over the time
we start getting more and more use
cases. is we are start getting more
budget more focused because the company
want to become data driven and AIdriven
that's [snorts] why suddenly we start
getting a lot of requirements as a data
engineers and a lot of requirements on
the data lakehouse not only me of course
everyone else of course the platforms
was not prepared yet because data bricks
was only offering like yeah the pispark
things um they had some yeah meta stores
and uh they had not yet like even SQL
engine. So it was like let's say it was
enough at that time but over the time we
have understood we are getting a lot of
requirements and a lot of attentions
and as well platforms like snowflake
fabric yeah um data bricks they start as
well understanding this this this issue
and the companies understood as well
that they need a data strategy like it's
not enough to have one very good data
engineer or few data architects and they
until like um uh let's say uh they are
like building some lake houses left and
right they start
discussing at the top level at
management not not only in Germany in
many countries they start discussing how
to make a data strategy for us how to
make uh let's say what is the best
platform that is suitable for us so the
data discussions moved from the lowest
level which is us start moving to the
top and moving to the top That means
there will be more organizations. There
will be more let's say um yeah uh
standards there will be more regulations
there will be more focus from the
security from auditors from different
aspects. That's why our data projects
whatever that you had start getting more
attention and this is a big transition
for our projects to the next levels that
you might hear if you enter any company
that they are discussing things like
we're going to offer the data as a
products we're going to offer the data
as um let's say in the data mesh
ecosystem
we need like I don't know marketplace
for the data and a lot of like let's a
uh terms the new terms that's why now
I'm going to take you into this world
about what is going on now in companies
where they have like data strategy and
how things get is getting bigger that's
why um now next we're going to speak
about more yeah about the governance
about the yeah uh the different designs
that companies are going through and
yeah we're going to go back to the
skitches of course so I'm going to share
again my screen.
Let's go back.
Uh just to check, is the voice clear
right? Are you hearing me or should I
move the mic a little bit away? Let me
know.
So,
let me just get few things before
we start the tunnel.
Okay,
voice very clear which makes me happy.
Now what happens?
Now we have to make chaos so that you
understand me
now.
Okay, this group of people are funny. So
over the time what happens at that more
people start consuming
and this is getting
very chaotic.
You know, you are getting a lot of
sources, you're getting a lot of
customers, a lot of requirements, a lot
of wishes, and
your lakehouse is getting bigger and
bigger and bigger. And the whole tea,
don't know why the size is not getting
bigger.
Um,
maybe like this. Yeah, the whole system
is getting bigger and chaotic and many
people want things from you. And my
friends it is almost an impossible job
for data engineers to understand all
those new systems that are joining and
as well to talk to all those people. So
you as a data architect or a data
engineer going to be jumping between
those people understand the requirements
extending the lakehouse building more
things and it's going to be nightmare
and this is all because of the strategy
of the company that's uh we call it here
if you leave it like this this is the
centralized strategy which is
very one of the worst things that you
might do. So what is going on here that
you have centralized solution.
So and what is happening is we having
just grab this here. So we are having um
a lot of consumers. Okay.
And that's all because you decided to
say
um I will do the whole thing alone.
I'm going to make the central lake house
for the whole company.
So
um and and and let me get this guy
those guys.
So yeah, I think with this I can explain
it. It's all because you said I'm going
to build the whole thing for [snorts]
the whole company and your consumers are
just consumers. They are not doing
anything. They are just consuming the
central. Yeah. And you are taking all
domains like the company has a lot of
domains, right? the sales, the
manufacturing, the after sales, the
finance, everything. You are like vacuum
machine that are that is bringing
everything to the center. So what's
going to happen? You're going to
explode. You will not be able to
maintain this team and you will not be
able to do the work.
So what you could do is that you start
giving up few of your lakehouse to the
others. Uh [snorts] this is what we call
uh let me just take you. So this is I'll
just put the title on it
center.
I don't know why I'm not able to make
the text bigger or something. So this is
the centralized solution. Now another
solution if you say you know what
we're going to be the hub
for only the bronze and silver
we will build for you. We I'm like
I'm going to bring where is the lake
house? So I will be bringing the bronze
and silver but the gold come on it is
something really hard for me to do as a
data engineer. So what I'm going to say
I'm going to clean up the data for you.
I'm going to make it in a shape which is
easy to consume. I'm going to make it
not anymore files. I'm going to make it
as a table. You can consume it by SQL.
But the final one the gold this data
model you have to do it on your own. So
what we can do is that we can go to the
strategy that says we are hop and
spokes.
Now
you say
okay we're going to give you some
engineers or a data analyst or whatever
and you do your own thing. Uh let me
hope that I can copy this. Yeah. So we
will not do any more gold. We're going
to do only the silver and bronze.
So and as well the reporting thing it's
going to something happen at your side.
So at the end it's going to looks like
this. Each team each spoke
have people that are just doing the gold
and everyone else is consuming the
silver.
So,
so this is little bit better, right?
This is little bit better than the
centralized. It looks like centralized,
but
things are little bit more moderated. We
in order to make this looks nicer.
Should I do it like this?
Uh, I think I should do it like this
better. So
just to looks like hab and spoke.
So
sorry for that but um
just to for you to have the shape of hub
spoke if you saw it
somewhere.
So we can have centralized team my
friends. I've seen this by the way. I
have um I've seen this in one company
but
this died as well very fast. [laughter]
Uh they said we're gonna make
centralized team. They going to bring
all the data of the company the whole
data into one place
and they going to bring the data in a
good shape. So they can do small TE's
they will do
the the cleanup process for the
companies. Okay.
But making a data model out of it. Do we
have a data model? Do I still have a
data model? Ah, yes. Here.
So, but building your reports, building
the final data model that you need. It's
something that you can do it on your
own. All right friends. So, those
engineers, they will not in the center.
They will not talk about your use cases.
They will never meet those. I don't
know. Yeah. Uh the business users, they
will not they will never meet anyone
outside of their central team. They just
get Yeah. Maybe the spokes. So, let me
just move this guy here. The spokes come
to the central team and say, "Hey, you
know what? Uh I would like to have more
five new sources." And they say, "For
sure, we're going to do it for you." And
they extend the bronze and silver. All
right? But they never speak with the
business. The central team, the central
team has nothing to do with the business
because those engineers they will not
develop the final products.
They are just doing let's say the middle
things. Yeah, I hope you understand what
I mean. So this data strategy my friends
is called
hub and sports.
So let me just get this one here
up and spokes
all right and I've seen this maybe some
company can adopt this. This really
depends like it is not a bad solution.
um they have a central team. They're
going to do the the the um middle steps,
intermediate steps and then everyone
else going to do the last steps.
Um now the thing is
still still still this going to explode.
I've seen
uh company hiring army of data engineers
because here they have army of source
systems they have over thousand I don't
know yeah databases
so this central hub is getting really
really uh a bubble yeah and that
explodes so it is still not working
that's Why the last option for them h
not the last option but another option
is that to say you know what
no central team at all everyone has to
do his own job without a central team.
So the central team dies
we don't do it anymore
and each team going to build their own
data leak
or data warehouse or whatever. Yeah. So,
oh oops, sorry.
No.
So, every
team
going to make their own stuff. And by
the way, it should not be always the
same thing. Yeah, it's not always the
lakehouse or maybe one team doing that
lakehouse, the other team is doing it
data warehouse.
and how how we split those team. By the
way, maybe I didn't spoke about this
which is very important. We split those
teams by domains. So this is domain A.
This is uh domain B.
By the way, those discussions that I'm
now discussing with you, it's something
that can happen at a top tier. Okay?
like don't expect that uh if you got
hired as uh I don't know yeah as a data
architect in small team that you will be
discussing those big concepts it's only
if you get to the upper layer because
those people has to put the data
strategy now I'm just trying to explain
for you the data strategy but still it's
something that you have to understand as
a data expert right I just want to say
those discussions and those designs it's
not something that's going to happen at
the lowest
Yeah.
Um,
so all right, I'm just checking the chat
if there's like questions or maybe I I
lost you guys. I don't know. [laughter]
So, uh, let's continue the story. So, we
have here uh, domain B, domain C and so
on. Do you know what is domains guide?
Because this is very important words.
Domain
A B C D. All right.
So a domain it could be as I told you
maybe big se yeah yeah section in a
company sector like as I said the HR
could be a domain the um the yeah the
sales could be a domain or it could be
like a process at the company specific
process they call it a domain like the
process of engineering the cars the
process of manufacturing the cars and
stuff like that.
we could split the domains by processes
or by the organization of the company
because usually the company is already
splitted into those domains. So that
means now this is awesome. This is
really awesome if you split it by
domains because we engineers
uh and data architect or like any data
experts we going to get a lot of domain
knowledge about only one thing. Now in
the old picture here
we have to have a knowledge about all
the domains of the company like getting
the domain knowledge it takes really
years of one domain guess like how this
can be really hard if you have to
understand all domains of the whole
company you will never be able to do
that maybe after retirement or something
like that. So that means by splitting by
domains it is a perfect thing because
finally the data workers data analysts
engineers whatever they can focus into
one domain and can and they can learn it
very well once you know the domains you
can understand the pains you can
understand how they work what are the
questions that you get so splitting the
data world into domains it is one of the
best things that now companies are
It makes everything better, everything
more clear, no more chaos and we are at
the end human. Yeah, we are not able to
understand everything about old company
like I spent
yeah eight years at Mercedes-Benz and I
have learned only two processes in one
one domain. I was not able to to learn
the whole thing. It's it's almost
impossible. So that's why no way the
central going to work or even a hub
could work in big companies. So
um now this is something we called
federated
that means everyone going to do their
own work
and uh again as I said they don't
um yeah they make lake houses they make
lakes they make warehouse and stuff. Now
the thing is
the story is not at the end because we
still going to need stuff from each
others.
Now if you are making a report about the
sales you might need few data from the
other domain but you would not need
everything. Okay. So you might need
subset of data from other domain. That's
why we might start connecting the
lakeouses together in order to just load
enhancement data. So that means there
will be some movement between those
domains and some interactions where we
exchange data between those lake lake
houses. But again the domain here if it
says sales it's going to be the
dominating domain that makes reports
about the sales but they start they
might start need data from other
departments like the manufacturing.
That's why my friends what's going to
happen with the federated is
we start exchanging data left and right.
All right.
So, and this is something that is not
really cool
[laughter]
because
it's going to bring again the chaos. And
what happens is that I don't know
whether I have here some auditors or
something like that. Let me just check.
Uh oh. I I really need like a new
figures for the auditors because they
are they they will not be happy with
this. I don't have one. But now let's
bring an auditor. Now an auditor going
to come for here and say hey what are
you doing? How how are you like how you
are managing the security of your data
and where this data come from? So the
auditors of the company they can start
questioning. Maybe I'm going to add here
a text so you understand what is this.
Oh,
so
or security officer or whatever. Yeah.
So someone that is uh check the
compliance of your data.
So bring forward
uh group. Yeah. All right. So you got
you might start get audited and say hey
let me know what which data you have
inside and uh how do you do the
transformations? So they're going to
start like auditing the solution and if
you don't know and over the time things
might get out of hand where uh you have
the sales data you have the
manufacturing and everything gets like
mixed up and the numbers here start
getting different from the numbers on
the left side because here as well you
start doing sales data sales data
analysis. Yeah, let me just say sales
and as well here we have sales. So we
don't know anymore where is the truth if
you exchange data without having a clear
yeah let's say documentations.
So the same editor going to go as well
to the other team and start asking a lot
of questions about the data and stuff.
Not only that the consumers you might
have start like cross consumers. They're
going to say but your data is something
different than the data from the other
domain. both of them are showing the
same data. So it's going to get lost if
we start sharing data between uh cross
domains. Now
what's going to happen is that um there
going to be need for the big question to
say who is actually the owner of the
sales data. So we're going to they going
to ask question who is the owner of of
the sales. Um that's why
they each domain going to start
promoting someone says ah you know what
I am that pay oh the product owner
we call it data products owner
we can permit someone from this domain
it could be from the business it could
be from anything and say hey you know
what I am the owner
can I make this smaller
so we're going permit someone from the
domain and say hey I am the owner of the
sales and only me going to accept
anything about my datam. So it's not
anymore because before if we go back to
those pictures you're going to feel who
is the owner of this like house the
owner going to be the engineers
they going to say uh yeah if you want my
data I going to allow you to go to gold
to silver and stuff. So usually the
[laughter] engineers going to decide who
gets what. But in modern companies it's
not anymore the engineers.
It is the responsible of the data or the
data product owner the data owner of the
domain. So if someone comes
and says hey I would like to get your
data. I'm from domain B. The engineers
will not go and say um yeah for sure why
not [laughter] go and get the access to
the gold. No the engineers say you know
what I'm just a technical guy you have
to go and speak with my product owner
data product owner. So we're going to
have like an owner for the data that
understands why do you need the data and
what are you doing in the reports. So
we're going to get start getting some
new responsibilities.
Um um I hope this makes sense because I
[laughter]
now it feels like I'm playing games.
All right. Um yeah. So I'm just
explaining the story why why we have
like um yeah we are getting those new
crazy roles. So that means we start
making for each domain for each data
the owners. Yeah this is new rule.
usually promoted from the business okay
from one of those here consumers or
something and they going to be
responsible of giving the final okay or
not
now
there's another issue there is another
big issue with this with the federated
I'm trying to give you step by step how
we go to the last phase okay now imagine
you are a data analyst or a data
scientist or whatever you get hired
you get hired ired to the company. You
are new. You are
excited about your job, your role and
yeah
someone came to you and say hey I would
like to have a report about
about specific topic. Yeah. Um, now if
you are not assigned to those domains
and you come to this picture here in the
middle and you're going to get totally
confused like where I'm going to find
the data to build this new dashboard,
this new report. Now you might start
like exploration phase journey and start
talking to those people. Okay, which
data you have, which data you have and
start jumping between those domains
until you understand where are your data
to make your use case. Again, not
everyone is assigned to domains. Yeah.
So, you will start like asking people
around where should I find the data and
stuff like that which is really bad. Now
the idea is to say to make every to make
everything is clean and uh let's say
yeah it's clear who is offering what
we're going to do we're going to make
centralized
we are back yeah to the hub a little bit
but this time this hub is a marketplace
marketplace.
Yeah. So what do you have in the
marketplace is the following.
Everyone going to announce let's say
their products.
Uh okay.
Everyone going to announce their
products into central place.
Say hey I offer the sales data. Hey I
offers the HR data. Hey I offer the
finance data.
Maybe not not arrows. Sorry for that.
Yeah, arrows. Okay. So the dotted arrow
means not the data going to move to
central place. This is very important to
understand
the data going to stay at their places.
Yeah. So it stays at domain A, it stays
at domain B, it stays at domain D and so
on. Is just we're going to make one
gigantic catalog about the data into
central place. This is what you call
um Do we have a catalog? Let me see. Oh,
it's bad.
Sorry, I just um Yeah, I would like to
bring a shape or something
again. Sorry, I'm not that prepared. But
um yeah, I think I hope Look, I I even
have my cup. Look, data wizbar as a
shape. So, let's put it here. One of
those engineers is data bar.
It's my brand now for some for some
reason. Um, so do we have a catalog
shape? My friends, I don't have one. So,
I'm going to leave it as it is.
Um, so it is a marketplace where
everyone announcing their data. I have
the sales. I have five tables. I have 10
tables. So it's like bizarre. [laughter]
Um now it is very very cool because the
data analyst
they just go to the marketplace and read
it and they can understand okay the
whole company how many data do we have
uh how many tables how many domains how
the sizes without doing this
journey by visiting visiting each of
those domains. So without running around
in circles to find the data they going
to go to one place and my friends she
going to find the data fast and she
going to understand ahu in order to make
my reports
I need
uh I need the sales data I need some we
need another arrow
make green ah I need this I need that I
need from this and I'm going to be able
to work and this is not only for the
analysts as well for the AI engineer for
any new projects happen in the company
we know where the data is. So,
um,
so yeah. So, this is why
we're going to need a central
marketplace. Central place. By the way,
this is not anymore federated.
I just introduced you to the data mesh.
This is the data mesh. It's not anymore
federated things are going to the
middle. So a data mesh is
um
no more central team doing the whole
thing. Yeah, this is very clear because
we have federated. We split the data by
domains. Each domain they're they going
to do the whole thing alone.
We going to have
data as a products. That means we're
going to have documentations. I'm I'm
going to explain more what is that as a
product because it's way more than that.
But we're going to have each domain they
going to make a catalog about their data
into central place the marketplace.
They're going to document it. They have
a product owners and um and everything
is like systemized and yeah documented
with high quality and all those stuff.
So the data mesh concept says again
physically each domain going to have
that data. They're going to own the data
at their own place. They never go to the
central place. They never go to the hub.
They never go to the central lakehouse.
They going to stay at the department at
the domain physically. Okay. Physically
going to stay at the domains. But we're
going to make a virtual place where the
whole metadata of the whole company
going to be described so that if auditor
comes
they can read the marketplace. If a new
developers comes to the company they
going to go to the marketplace. If any
new data use case happen to the company
we start from the marketplace and
understand it.
Is this clear so far?
Nice.
Uh, can you please All right. And my
friends,
this is not uh only the Okay, I'm going
to make my cup bigger. [laughter]
And uh this this picture, it is not only
the companies that understood it who
understood this as well.
It's always the data bricks. They are
very very
up to date with all pains of companies.
This is amazing. Really,
I'm not trying here to sell anything,
okay? I'm I'm not sponsored or something
from data bricks. I'm just trying to say
here data bricks came and understood.
Oh,
um companies are moving to this
and how about I'm going to
offer something similar to this.
I would like like because that data
brick stopped us here. Uh let me just
take the icon.
Now I'm breaking a little bit the
vendor. Okay, but it is not that
important. Now data bricks start stops
at here and said hey you can make spark
you can make like houses. It's the best
thing and they start selling this like
crazy
but they saw this is happening.
companies are making multiple lakehouses
left and right and they're going to need
something of called marketplace
and now if you are learning data bricks
you're going to understand the origins
of the unity catalog
unity catalog is made for this is made
in order to make data mesh concepts in
order to make domain driven
architectures this is what we call
domain dri you're going to hear a lot if
you go as an architect
people are making domain oriented or
domain um driven architecture and this
is exactly what we mean at the data
world we say data mesh and now the
vendor data bricks join this picture
now this is exactly what they are trying
to sell for the companies
which is yeah I have some doubts about
it but it's working but not for big
companies
Like let me just explain where's that's
why they
two years ago
I was yeah I was making my projects and
then suddenly I've I've seen something
called catalog.
Yeah the catalog. Yeah the unity
catalog. They introduced the Unity
catalog. Who knows Unity catalog?
You know what is unit? Yeah. Let's see
anyone here is learning data bricks
or everyone now sleeping. [laughter]
Uh let me to be honest I'm not checking
how much viewers do we have or did I
make the chat very slow? I have no idea.
So how much we have? Oh we have 300
people are watching. Wow. I didn't
expect this. I think we reached like 400
or something. Now we have 300 are here.
Um yeah, yeah, I'm going to share those
sketches if you want. I don't mind at
all. Oh man. So,
so now,
so now, okay, now data bricks had
something similar like um marketplace,
but it was not a marketplace. It was
just like
a yeah
um how can I explain it for you? It was
just
a database catalog for your project.
just only for you for your project.
Okay? And they called it the hive meta
meta store. This is legacy name. You
will not find it but I'm just telling
you the story about it. They have like
some kind Yeah, it looks like a
database. Okay. You are you you are
looking at the UN catalog but it was
only for you for your projects. Okay.
And they switched the whole thing to a
marketplace.
So you see here it's called my
organization. Well maybe in big
companies it's going to be like yeah the
company's name and you will be able to
browse not only your projects but you're
going to find as well all the cataloges
of the whole company. Now I cannot show
you the example because I have here only
one example. So imagine here I'm going
to see inside my organization maybe
30 cataloges the sales the after sales
the manufacturing and all those stuff.
So that means they made this local
catalog that is available only for a
project. They made it only visible for
the whole company. And this is what
suddenly I was like working twice as
this happens to my project. I was
working at my project and I saw only one
catalog. This is my catalog and I'm
doing the silver bronze gold and I'm
building the warehouse.
And then in the next day I was not
following the the news. I opened my
catalog and I saw 200 cataloges. That's
all because suddenly I'm able to see the
whole company catalog. They turned
the each local instance or each local
project into into like a global catalog
that is available for everyone. So
everyone was able to see my projects and
I am able to see everyone else projects.
So that means
here
if you are working in data bricks this
is the unity catalog my friends
and with that we just I I don't know I
think they did cost a lot of work they
just turned the local cataloges
that each projects have into a global
one and they solved this issue with the
data mesh
Um, and that's exactly why we have now
something called Unity catalog. This is
exactly the reason behind it. They want
everyone to be able to access everyone
or let's say everything should be
visible for everyone else. Um, all
right. So
now there's still issue.
The thing is the vendor they are trying
to yeah to sell us this idea which is
amazing I think but this going to work
yeah I'm going to say only if everyone
is working in data bricks
right
so if if everyone is in data bricks this
going to work because they going to
share their stuff to the middle right
now if a company gets I don't know
sophisticated and they do things outside
of catalog. This going to be challenging
to make the unity catalog as a central
place. They try like there's some work
around and stuff but they it could work
of course but
if the company have like onrem solutions
if one domain is not working at all in
the cloud if other is using I don't know
yeah Azure uh we have aure stuff fabric
yeah if the company is not clean about
that platform strategy and they allow
multiple platforms
then sadly this will not work. That's
why in some companies if they are big
enough to say data bricks is not enough
for them they have to make their own
catalog like at the end I'm going to
show you a few examples I have made some
with clothes I'm just prepared few yeah
visuals for you uh yeah I don't have
here catalog icon let's bring this here
so the company should then develop their
own marketplace for this okay
Um yeah so my friends this is very cool
to understand
what is a data mesh and how our data is
turning into something called products.
Okay. So it is not anymore this picture
where you have central data engineers
just prepare the data and give it. The
world is is getting bigger. We are
getting a lot of new things. We are
focusing on only on domains. We have
yeah the product owners we have a
marketplace for data and um yeah we are
transitioning to this domain driven
architecture which I believe it is it is
like I'm really happy with this. Yeah
it's like one of the best I'm going to
say so far best practices on how to do
it. I love to have the idea of having
the metadata into Oops.
Oh wait I lost everything. No here I
thought I've lost everything. I love Oh
man. Yes. Okay. I think my PC or my Mac
is giving up.
Uh one hard refresh solve the day.
[laughter]
Okay. So slowly.
So
yeah. Okay. So I uh again I love this
idea to have the metadata into stored
into one place and as well to have the
domains spread it around. Don't store
anything centrally for big companies it
will not work and yeah those discussions
again happens at the elite level of the
architect the principal architects and
the let's say the big managers the data
officers and stuff like that. So it's
not something that we decide at our
level but if you hear about it if you
join a company or something that they
are doing domain you should know about
this structure and it is relevant for
you as a data analyst and stuff like
that. Now I have built some
fake
fake marketplace for you to see it at
least to have some feeling what this
means.
Uh yeah again thanks for
cla I can make a lot of fake things now
uh where I have prepared it
marketplace
oh the marketplace
so let me show you just I don't want to
show you only sketches come on
now
welcome to my fake
my fake uh marketplace.
So, um I've made this not me. AI made
this for me. So, uh it looks like this.
It is a shop. You enter as a data
analyst. You enter as a data scientist,
whatever. And you would like to know um
how your data looks like. By the way,
I'm not bragging or something. My data
products at Mercedes-Benz was number
one, the highest consumed data product
in the whole company. It was all because
the quality that we added and uh yeah, I
was really proud of it because um
uh we had like really huge team 20 data
engineers in my team. I was the project
lead for that and as well leading the
projects and we got like it's really
competition at the end. you have
prepared data products and you make
really like it's gonna be your baby. You
gonna feel I want to push on the
numbers. I want to be the best data that
I'm going to provide in the company. I
want to make sure that all the customers
are happy and I was lucky as well to be
in very important domain. That's why uh
yeah my data product at Mercedes-Benz
was number one. And uh yeah, of course,
if the company implemented looks like
this, they're going to have like it's
similar to the Unity catalog but fake
one.
So you're going to see the numbers of
how many uh who are the highest like
consumers and then you're going to say
okay this is the vehicle data those are
the other uh domains and the other data
products that are offered the HR and all
those stuff and you as a data analyst
you have the luxury to sit back and say
I I would like to get the vehicle sales.
So you enter this data product.
Now, usually you have to see a lot of uh
descriptions about the data product.
Okay.
Um
I'm now explaining for you what is a
data product. Okay. So, um I know that
the question you don't know what what is
exactly data product. So, a data product
it is something
first of all described.
So, now you can see okay this data
product has five tables. It's all about
description. Okay. And it has an owner.
So for example here I see the owner the
business owner of this data and I know
how to request it and I know which team
did build this data products. So I can
contact the technical team and um yeah I
can see some other metadata. Usually we
see as well the contract about the data
contract. This as well you might hear
about the data contracts. It is like for
example me as a data engineer um I'm
going to commit to something. I'm going
to say every day my data going to get
refreshed at 2:00 a.m. and I'm going to
put it as a contract. So that means if I
bring my data into a marketplace
I have to write down the data contract
or maybe to fill the requirements that I
say my data get refreshed every day. my
data going to be stream data. My data
going to be I don't know once a week and
something like that. So that means
developing data it's not finished by
just cleaning up the data and that's it.
You have to have a data owner for it.
You have to have a data contract for it.
And now once you say okay this looks
good I go and request the data. Now of
course the request of the data will not
go to the technical team. is going to go
to the owner of the data, the product
owner. Yeah. And the and they decide
whether you're going to get the data or
not. You have to explain why you want to
access their data. After that, uh you
can drill down of course in the data
product like for example going over here
and start saying uh like more details
about the data. You can see okay how
many rows, how many like what is the
size, where it's located, when last time
refresh. a lot of meta data and um and
you can see now
that maybe I'm going to of course we are
moving now to the data products thing
that the data on the left side right
everyone knows that in Excel and table
and stuff like that but on the right
side there's like I don't know yeah
add-ons owns like ex you are explaining
the data you are adding more flavors to
it you are um giving more context to the
data Like for example the very very
obvious thing that we could add to the
data is the meta data. Do you know what
is metadata? It is the data about the
data. So on the left side it is our data
right. So I have the customer ID, the
name, the email, this country. Yeah this
is your data. But on the right side that
metadata it is just a description. So
the customer ID has the data type
integer. It is not n not null and it
means customer has an ID that never
reused. The full name is the first name
and the last name. So here I cannot see
like for example my name or any other
customer name. I'm just saying
description metadata describes my data
describe the structure. Okay.
So
and it could be anything not only the
table name not only the column name um
it could describe like the size of the
data the format the location yeah when
it's last time updated now those
informations
now yeah we are getting to the metadata
concept now those informations that we
have it is not only important anymore
for the human of course if you are data
analyst if you are data engineer
um
you're going um you're going to need
those informations because now you have
more understanding about the data. Now
without a metadata what could happen
with that you're going to see the data
and you have to explore it to understand
the content but as a data analyst if you
look to the metadata you're going to
understand immediately what is going on
what is the content so it's always nice
to have descriptions yeah for the tables
it's always nice to have descriptions
for the columns and stuff like those so
that's why metadata
is very important for humans and now I
just go back to the talking head to
explain for you metadata. It was before
a luxury thing that we do. If I am data
engineer and I have enough time, I'm
going to go and make a metadata in order
to let you understand my data. But now
it's becoming even more important than
the data itself
because
um
we have AI. [laughter]
If we don't have metadata AI going to go
to your data like this is one of the
hardest things that is now happening
data and AI it's some I have my opinion
about it but it is something that is not
working very well because if I send an
AI to my data without any context and
you understand in AI context is very
important what can happen that the AI
might target wrong tables they might do
wrong joins they might I don't know
select different tables that has nothing
to do with your prompts and that's all
because if you are giving uh let's say
no context at all about your data that's
why my friends
we data engineers now one of our main
jobs not only to transfer prepare the
data but as well to add the context
which is the met at least the bare
minimum is the meta data now the
metadata going to help the AI agents and
the AI to be more accurate with your
data. So that means if now AI
uh let me just make my smaller. Now if
the AI have the data on the left side
and as well the metadata on the right
side, it going to be more accurate and
going to understand the context of the
company's data. That's why if I now I'm
back to projects my focus on generating
metadata for my data products going to
be again way more important maybe even
doing data quality
because most of the use cases that I'm
going to get as a data engineer over the
time going to be AI use cases and if I
don't provide the metadata the AI use
case is going to fail. So it's going to
be central job for us to add in our
pipelines to add a perfect metadata. And
I can tell you something.
You don't have to add it manually
yourself. You could work with the AI in
order to automatically generate those
metadata. But we cannot go completely
out of the pictures.
This is different discussion but I'm
just
saying saying that we're going to use
engineers as well the AI to generate the
metadata using the company's
documentations and PDFs and stuff and
the AI going to reuse those stuff in
order to answer questions okay
accurately. Not only that now you're
going to hear about the data products or
people are building something called
semantic layer.
Um, how I'm going to explain this? I
have like a picture for this
now. It's getting interesting. Right.
I'm prepared. I'm not that I came with
few stuff. I have to find this out.
Uh,
I had an really good example to explain
this
marketplace. We had a marketplace.
Give me a second. I'm going to find this
example for you. [snorts]
Are you enjoying so far the session? Is
this something new that you didn't know
before? By the way, if I Yeah, I made
nice application here. Maybe I can sell
it. Make new data platform
concurrent for data bricks. I'm going to
call it
I don't know what's to suggest for a new
platform name
data bricks data
I think we can build easily data
platforms now.
Okay. Now, uh, do you see this? Uh, I
think I have to maybe move myself.
Maybe here.
Here.
Yeah, be like this. I'm not important.
Let me just make me smaller. Fire
pricks. [laughter]
[snorts]
Um, okay. So, now
the thing is look to the left side.
If we prompt the AI and say okay how
much revenue that we have now the AI
going to have the metadata okay going to
read it going to understand it and then
make some kind of SQL query and give you
a number so it's very simple this is
just aggregating the sales right
so it's going to go and said okay how
much revenue this looks like a revenue
and I'm going to use it in order to
aggregate the data and get the numbers.
Now the thing is this is maybe
buyer bricks. Yeah, [laughter]
brick by brick. Now
I don't know whether you heard about the
logo scandal in in USA brick by brick.
Now
uh if the AI don't have any like
have only the metadata
it's going to go and make the
aggregation correct and then we're going
to get the numbers but now things are
not that simple at companies right
because we have a logic if you are a
data analyst you understand exactly it
is rarely that you're going to do such
um um such like very simple aggregations
There is always so much context to the
numbers. There is always some filters.
There are some big SQL queries and stuff
like that. Now,
how we going to tell the AI about it?
That if you want to calculate the
revenue, you have to use other formula
and this is by my friends adding a
semantic layer on top of our data.
Semantic layer is very simple. It's just
I don't know whether you learned code or
not.
Um, semantic layer it is like you are
giving a skill or you are giving like
you are explaining for the AI how to
calculate the revenue correctly by
adding a filter because it makes no
sense to find the revenue for all the
orders in the table. You should always
filter by the delivered only this
status. We have status like cancelled.
We have status that is I don't know yeah
that is not yet approved stuff like
that. We at a company we say some we say
the revenue can happen only for the
orders where the status delivered. Now
we have to put this information
somewhere for our data products. So that
if we talk to the AI by the way not only
AI for the human as well for the the
PowerBI ducks calculations for anything
if we add this nice information to our
data products now if any kind of
consumer comes to my data they know
exactly how to calculate their revenue.
So it is just a calculation I'm just
describing how to use my products. Got
it?
So metadata alone it is not enough.
Metadata alone it's not enough. We have
as well to add semantics and semantics
if you hear it I know that's like sounds
yeah very confusing or something like I
don't know
um rocket science but it's very simple.
I'm just adding how to calculate things
on my data products. Once you add this
piece of informations now my friends AI
going to be happy going to calculate the
numbers correctly. If a data analyst
comes to you and say hey how I'm going
to calculate the revenue you don't have
to go and explain for them how to
calculate it. You say everything is
described in my data products.
So that means if you have a data product
it's not enough to describe the data
product itself. You have as well to
describe how to calculate the numbers of
my data products, how to do calculations
like what is the total customers. Yeah,
you have to count the distinct of the
customer ID, how to find the new
customers and so on. So you add
formulas, you add, you add calculations,
very simple calculations.
Now if you do this then AI can do this
correctly. If a data analyst comes to
you and say how to calculate things, you
don't have to say anything. You say go
and read the semantic layer of my data
products and once they read it the data
analyst they can go and do the
aggregation correctly. With this we are
protecting our confusion. If we like
guys, if we
if we start exchanging data between each
others, right,
and we put the semantic in the middle,
then if we make two reports about the
sales, the numbers
going to look nice because both of teams
are using the same calculation type. If
we don't put this information in the
marketplace or in my data products,
one team going to calculate it without a
distinct and another team going to
calculate it with a distinct and a third
AI tool will calculate it totally
different. So it going to be chaos.
That's why if you are developing data
products, you have to add the semantic.
And I'm not saying here for each small
thing you have to go and add the
measures or the metrics. I'm going to
say only for the major most important
things that you think people going to
keep calculating this all my time like
if I have a customers table what people
going to calculate on my my data product
they're going to find the total number
of customers right
so this is very simple so that means if
you are offering data you have to give
metadata
this is the bare minimum now you have to
add some semantic on top of
And now it comes data lineage. Now data
lineage it is as well I'm going to say a
third level of giving context to your
data. This is especially important for
the auditors
and like I'm going to say even for me as
an engineer. So now the auditor where is
it? Here the auditor. Now they're going
to ask you where the data come from,
where the data goes and how you do this,
how you do that, where like show me the
flow and stuff like that. Now, if you
tell them, you know what, go to the
marketplace or go to my data products
and you're going to find it.
Now, instead of asking you all those
questions, you're going to say, my data
product has a data lineage. Data
lineage, it's all about saying say where
the data come from and where the data
goes. Okay? who like where I get the
data from, what are the sources and who
consumes me. So for the table customers,
it's very simple. Look like look at
this.
I have a product called dimension
customer. This is my gold. I have two
consumers consuming my product. Someone
is building a dashboard called sales
dashboard. And there is an AI agent
that is consuming as well my dimension
customer. The information customer in
gold comes from the silver customer. The
silver comes from the bronze table
called customer rows and the bronze
comes from the source system called CRM
and they call it like this CRM.
customers. So now the auditor going to
come and see the whole knowledge uh the
the whole lineage and they going to
understand exactly where the data comes
from and who consumes it and that's
they going to prevent having data leaks.
They're going to prevent having bad
issues and yeah I will I will be fair.
Data lineage is not only for the
auditors.
It's going to be as well good for
everyone actually even for you as a
developer. If you know how the data
flows inside your tables, you can find
weird things. You can find bad um yeah
maybe strange things inside your your
ETL. You say yeah why this table
customer comes from different table. So
you can use it in order as well for you
to discover issues in your data flow or
the data architect can as well use it.
So I'm going to say data lage it is
really useful for everyone and to be
fair
to be fair with you I think we have all
those stuff as well in data bricks. Um
let me just go to gold.
So, uh, if I go to any table
and then go to the lineage,
um, oh, I have a lot of things. I've
been experimenting so much things.
Um, so yeah, you're going to see the
lineage as well in data bricks. Ah, look
at this. I think it's better than what
I've shown you. Little bit more
complicated. So it shows you in the data
lineage how the data flows from the
sources to the next tables. Okay. So you
can see it in data bricks and as well
you can add those semantic layer. I have
add here some semantic layer as well on
top it's called measures. So if you go
to the tables and data bricks and you
create something called metric views.
Yeah. So it is the metric view. This is
the semantic layer that you could add on
top of your tables. you can find here
details, permissions. Oh, sorry. Yeah.
So, this is exactly what I'm talking
about. Those are um measures or let's
say semantics on top of your data
products. Uh but again, this is only if
your company working in data bricks. If
things get mixed, you need my product
which is bar pricks.
You'll need my central. I have to I have
to sell this.
I have to sell this. So if you have
multiple data platforms, you're going to
need like some third party stuff.
And um of course comes the last thing
which is the data contracts for your
data products. This is again I think
this is too little. You have to say who
is the data owner, how you refresh the
data and as well very important data
contracts. You're going to explain as
well how often your schema going to
change like is it the schema frozen like
is it like is the schema changes over
the time all time? Do you have like new
columns? Are you renaming things? Uh how
stable is your schema? How stable is
your stuff? So a data contract you could
have like it's contract between let me
just go back to this picture you
understand me
um so
um this image is getting crazy so let me
just clean up a little bit go out
um
now
so what is a contract
[cough]
[clears throat]
If
uh so if one engineer says I need data
from lift and this is the other engineer
okay so they say I need your gold data
for some customers that I have in my
domain so they're going to ask for data
of course they have to get approved from
data products and stuff like that
but this engineer going to say I'm
making the whole system depending on you
on on your system as well. So if
something breaks by the way this is
something that not only in data mesh
it's like between system and system you
make a contract where you just explain
this is the contract
uh you just explain stuff about what is
the expectations of your data products.
So you say, you know what, if you want
to consume my data, um, you're going to
understand my schema changes a lot.
You're going to understand I refresh my
data once a week. You're going to
understand if them if data goes down for
a week, I don't have enough team, let's
say, to repair it so fast. So you have
to pair with me maybe two weeks, three
weeks until I repair the data. So it's
just a contract where you fill it with
all let's say things that you can commit
on. Now if you see the contract and say
okay this looks good I don't mind then
you uh you consume the data or you say
ah the contract is really bad I cannot
make my lake house depending on this
lakehouse that's why you say okay this
is bad I will not connect anything. So a
contract is very important is commitment
between two source systems or two
systems sorry
and they kind of use it as well to make
for you problems like if you say my
commitment in my contract I'm going to
load the data once a day and they
noticed the domain B that you refresh
the data once a week they're going to
come to you with the contract say hey
you said that you refresh the data once
a day why you are doing it once a week
so if you write down things inside the
contract. You should be yeah responsible
of it. So it is amazing to put a
contract and as well it is something
that we do by the way not only in the
data mesh we do all time. If I go to to
to yeah the original source here if I
want to connect a new source as well I
try to get from them like you going to
have here the source system
source system responsible
um you're going to ask for a data
contract from them in order to connect
that data you say okay I'm going to
access your data in order to build my
data warehouse and I need to have a
contract with
This is very important by the way and as
well this is something that data
architects as well have to check the
contracts between the systems. Yeah. So
it's written
commitment contract between two systems.
It could be source system to data leak
house source system to data warehouse
lakehouse with lake house whatever
but you have to add it to your data
products.
So that leaves us with this my friends.
Now in the modern days
um let me just check whether everything
is working. Yeah. Now in a modern day my
friends
you don't just offer the data. Let me
just hear talking head kid.
Now that seems my friends offering the
data now in the modern days it's not
only you're just going to give someone
access to a table. You have to add on
top of it a lot of things. the metadata,
the semantics, the data lineage, the
data contracts and who is the data owner
and all those stuff, who can who can
speak about who can access what and all
those stuff. So things getting more and
more complicated in enterprise companies
and that's all because we are getting
more attention over the time. We are
getting more use cases. We are getting
the AI. So we are not anymore those
casual
data experts that runs only for nice to
have project at companies. Things are
getting serious about data and that's
why
as well things are getting serious about
how we offer data. This is exactly what
we mean with data products. Data
products this works in the data mesh
yeah ecosystem.
Um
so I hope this makes sense for you. I
hope you if you understood I know we
went to a level of enterprise about it's
not something that each data analyst
must know but if you enter the serious
op you're going to start hearing about
this and now I give you some back uh
back stories about the data architects
um now if we go back because I think we
have to wrap up a little bit
um if we go back to this I think we have
covered many topics But
one of the topics that I wanted to cover
is the data modeling. I'm sorry for that
but I I think I'm getting tired. It's
better to continue other day.
Um
so now if you will look to the
requirements. Yeah.
Now we have some understanding about
just let me switch.
So what is a [clears throat] data
strategy? Yeah. What is the data
architecture? What is data products?
What is the data mesh? What is medallion
architecture? You have heard all those
stuff today.
Data fabric [clears throat] is not
um those stuff we didn't cover. Data
governance. What is the data lineage?
Right?
Let me just zoom in a little bit. I
don't know whether you can see those
stuff. [snorts]
All right. So what is data loage
lineage? What is emit data management?
This is exactly what I showed you. What
is a data catalog? What are the data
contracts?
Now if we go to the platforms, we
covered everything right my friends. So
data warehouse the lakehouse the data
lake future store partitioning
partitioning it is like for um uh
performance optimizations for data
engineers future stores it is something
for data analysts a scientist for AI as
well
the modeling sadly sadly I didn't cover
anything for you
now but we have covered the first one
the semantic layer so we know what is
semantic layer I would like to explain
for you data vaults all those stuff I
job in another session uh in the
integration now you know what is ETL
data integration maybe if you heard this
it is part of data moduling but it's all
about you are getting many source
systems
it's all about you are getting many
different source systems many tables and
since you are bringing everything into
one central data warehouse or data
lakehouse you want to learn or let's say
you have to do data integrations, how
I'm going to bring those different
tables from different sources into one
table, maybe into one source of truth.
So that's why it's all about how I'm
going to connect those different shapes
of tables into one integrated table that
could be used for analytics. Like if I
have I don't know yeah uh two sources
one source is giving me the customer
information another one as well giving
me the customer information they use
different shape of customer ID or
customer keys and if I bring them
together into one flat table they will
not work I have to do a lot of work in
order to make them fit I'm hitting the
mic but this is type of data modeling
but uh yeah I just wanted to explain for
you oh
what this means now
data modeling as I said it's not covered
so data integration data pipelines I
think everyone knows this is yeah the
things that we do streaming data
ingestion yeah I think those stuff we
didn't talked about it the ELT so you
know what is ELT
uh event driven data migrations you have
heard about it a little bit about how we
migrate from one system to another but
uh yeah so with that I think I'm happy
that we covered or just at least we I
gave you some sounding about all those
terms that are requested in the ad jobs
or or the posting uh from a data
architect or a data engineer but I
believe if I extend it to a data analyst
same topics is going to uh join
um so
I'm going to think about maybe extending
this not Now maybe in another stream I
would like to show you how I draw live
like I would like to show you one
requirement and then how I go from the
requirement into data architecture but I
felt that this is very relevant for you
to understand those yeah buzzwords that
we have and um yeah so I think we need
another live stream it will not be
tomorrow I'm sorry I would like to have
it tomorrow but um um I have some plans
but what I'm going I say I enjoyed it so
much explaining for you those stuff. I
hope that you enjoyed it. Um, and if you
have of course any questions, make sure
to leave it in the comments. And I'm
going to say if you like those stuff,
support the channel. Don't forget about
that. I still have seen in my channel
like more than yeah around 30% only
supporting and consuming my content. So
make sure to support the channel and all
those stuff. I would like to give you
some stuff maybe if you're still here
I'm gonna let you know a few stuff that
I'm doing now. Um I'm going full in into
AI.
Uh what I mean with AI um I have a lot
of experience about data engineering and
all those stuff the data architects and
I'm still seeing the AI is not suitable
at all for data. It is full of garbage
currently and I'm trying to push now the
limits and I'm learning as well how to
use code how to use different AIs in
order to help you as a data analyst and
data engineer to do high-end level
projects. I'm not speak about toy
project and toy AI. I don't know
download here those skills and you're
going to be the best I don't know data
analyst and those stuff. Um I'm doing
I've done like more than 12 projects. I
bought more than 10 accounts from cloud
full push full farming let's say of um
yeah uh pushing the limit about data and
AI. I'm going to be publishing a lot of
things about data and AI but it's not
going to be the garbage let's say
content about uh yeah uh the top 10
prompts or install this and you're going
to get those stuff. I want to do it
serious. I want really to give the right
let's say uh answers or let's say the
right skills the right things so that
you could use include as a data engineer
as a data analyst but I have some
standards so if I don't reach it I would
not give you crap that's why I'm doing a
lot of things but I cannot yet publish
it for you first of all there are some
people stealing the content and as well
uh I don't want to give you things that
are half true um So that means there
will be a lot of content that's going to
come how to use AI truly for data and uh
how to uh to make it secure and all
those stuff but I need some time about
it in order to prepare for you but is
something that's going to happen this
year. I'm not saying next year or
something like that. So that means I
will continue with the PowerBI ducks and
all those stuff. There's going to be
weekly videos about it. And um about
Python, a lot of you are asking about
Python. I'm going to come after
September. I think I'm going to do a
quick vacation and then starting from
September I'm going to go with the
advanced topics of Python. So this is as
well something that I would like to
announce about data bricks. I might
bring from time to time some data bricks
projects but I I'm really focusing now
to bring you this topic cloud AI and
data and honest one and the real one.
I'm not gonna be another one talking
about AI. So if you are willing to join
this journey with me about yeah this
channel and stuff make sure to support
guys. This is really important. Only 30
are supporting uh with those likes and
stuff. Uh my videos takes time until to
produce. I have to sketch everything.
Everything happens manually by the way.
All the sketches
that I do everything happens manually. I
have to do all those stuff. I I spend
hours sketching those stuff. I could
make everything paid, but thanks god I
have sponsor like uh data camp. They
sponsored my videos and they allow you
this allows me to make free content for
you. Uh [snorts] but um other otherwise
I have big announcement that going to
come this year. I cannot say what which
is exactly it's not about cloud and AI
cloud or AI but there will be going to
be a big announcement about the channel
and uh but I'm going to wait a little
bit for it. So there will be a lot of
excitement yeah that I'm going to bring
to the channel. That's why I'm little
bit now yeah slow on making content but
for sure there will be some I'm going to
say epic things that's going to come. Uh
so I hope that you are excited about it.
I enjoy so much this live session. I'm
going to make the second live session
about data architects. It's going to be
quicker one not like this. And uh I'm
going to make one live session. It's all
about my story. So it will not be a
technical one. I want to explain for you
my story. Who am I? How did this works?
As I was yeah someone in Syria and how I
moved to Germany, how I studied, how I
climbed in the company, my maybe as well
about some private things, how my
mindset, how I think. So I would like to
make one live session about me, let's
say to to understand who is Barra, who
did make this SQL and stuff like that.
maybe inspires you because I came from
situation that is [snorts] yeah not that
easy. Yeah, I had a lot of struggle
until I reached what I have now which is
I'm really happy about it. So I'm going
to make another live stream called who
is bar and it's going to be stories
about my life. uh if you are interested
of course you can join but for the data
architecture I promise you another
session to focus more about taking your
requirements build uh data architecture
from it live stream and as well to talk
about few data modeling techniques what
is data vault and why do we need data
vault yeah so
I'm really happy about this session I
hope you enjoyed it did you like it you
have any questions before we wrap up. Do
you enjoy this session? Did make sense
for you.
If
yes, then I'm really happy. I'm going to
say
thank you so much for joining this live
session. I really enjoyed it. It was
long one. I don't know how long are we,
but I'm going to check afterward. And um
yeah,
maybe I'm going to make bar breaks. Who
knows? So, have a nice evening and good
sleep at India and thank you so much for
joining and see you next time. Bye-bye.
And next time I bring some music.
Three hours. Crazy. Three hours.
>> [clears throat]