Hey friends. So now we're going to do
something amazing. We're going to go and
build data model projects in PowerBI
exactly like I do in my real projects.
The thing is I have been involved in
many PowerBI projects at my work that
had bad struggle with the performance
and as well delivering wrong numbers.
But after investigating it was not the
dashboard was bad or ducks almost each
time it was the bad model underneath the
reports. So that's why I have prepared
for you for this project a nightmare
data set that looks exactly like the one
that I have seen in companies. Full
chaos, bad shapes, bad data models, and
as well bad relationships. So now what
I'm going to do, I'm going to walk you
through this data model step by step
exactly like I do in my real project. So
that at the end we're going to get a
healthy data model that is ready for
reporting. And yes, this is the best way
to learn data modeling by doing
projects, not just like watching
disconnected videos. So that at the end
you develop like a feeling for the whole
process end to end. And very important
you don't just watch me doing the things
you always work with me. So for each
step you pause the video you do it at
your end and then you continue. All
right my friends. So this is going to be
fun project to do and now let's get
started.
>> Battle stations everybody. Let's go go
go.
>> Okay. So now before we jump in I'm going
to show you the project faces for the
data moduling. So first we have to
prepare. We're going to open the mess.
So we're going to set up the workspaces
in power query and then we're going to
start investigating. So we're going to
start exploring and have basic
understanding of the tables. What is the
business? What are the entities? Which
one are good candidates for dimensions?
Which are for facts. So we're going to
develop like a big picture in our head.
The second phase we start building. So
we start building the dimensions. We're
going to find like a group of tables
that relate to each others and turn them
into clean dimension. So we keep
iterating until we build all the
dimensions for the data model. Then the
third step we're going to start building
the facts and connect the dimensions to
them. So we take all those event tables
and start building the fact. And after
that we connect all the dimensions to
our new facts and start testing of
course so that the numbers never break
silently in our data model. And then the
last phase is going to be the polishing
phase. We're going to go and add
security to our data model. And then we
do like final test to validate the whole
data model. So this is the whole
project. So those are the faces that
we're going to go through and as well
before we start like building anything
we have to keep in our mind those rules
we're going to follow them from the
start to the end no matter which step we
are in. So the first rule or goal is to
build star schema fact table in the
middle surrounded by dimensions and we
never connect facts table together. The
second rule we have always to understand
before do any changes specially we have
to understand always first the grain of
each table. We have always to say it
loud in order to understand the grain.
Otherwise, we're going to build wrong
dimensions and facts. Now, the third
rule, every info, every column inside
our data model must earn its place. So,
that means if we find any column that is
not really needed for analytics and
reporting, we have to go and drop it.
And that's because of two reasons. First
of all, they are wasting space inside
our PowerBI file. If you have a lot of
unnecessary columns, your PowerBI file
going to be really heavy and hard to
refresh and hard to move. So that's why
we remove them to have some space. And
the second and more important, they
going to confuse you during building the
visuals and reports. So if we find
anything unnecessary, we just go and
drop it. We can always go and bring it
back if we need it. Rule number four, we
always have to protect the numbers, we
must know by heart the totals of our
data model. So that each time we do like
a change or we connect something new, we
go and check those numbers to make sure
that they don't break. And now we come
to the final rule or let's say big step.
We have to make sure that we are
following standards that we have to
define before starting the projects. And
of course those standards we can define
them from one project to another depends
on the requirements. But for this
project the standards going to be like
this. First of all we have to define the
language. Yes, this sounds like simple
but I saw a lot of projects where they
are mixing languages in the data model.
So yes the language going to be here
English. Then we have to follow the same
naming convention for the table and the
columns. And of course there are a lot
of naming conventions but for these
projects we're going to follow the snake
case. All letters all characters are
lowered and they are separated with
underscore. Now as well you have to
define the prefixes and the suffixes
like for example in the table names. If
we have a fact table we can have the
prefix fact score like for example fact
underscore sales. And if it is dimension
it's going to be dim shortcut for
dimension like only three letters
underscore then the dimension name like
for example dim customer. This is really
important because I saw a lot of
confusion if a lot of people are working
on the same PowerBI project. One going
to call it D customer and another
developer going to call it dimension
customer. So we have to set up the
standard for our projects before we
start building. Now about the columns we
as well could bring some standards like
for example the surrogate keys anything
that we create inside the data model
going to ends with the suffix underscore
key like for example customer key
product key. So once you see in the data
model okay it ends with underscore key
that means we created that it is not a
natural key that cames from the source
like for example the customer underscore
id this is something comes from the
source file and the customer underscore
key it is a surrogate key that we just
created in the model so that you have
understand the different types of your
keys in the model. Now the last rule we
have to make everything friendly. So
that means we have to give for
everything the table name the column
name even some values inside our tables
friendly meaningful name so that once
you start building the reports the
values can be friendly and everyone can
follow the reports we don't bring any
cryptical shortcut technical names that
we inherited from the source systems so
this is the setup those are the faces
the rules the mindsets that we're going
to follow through the whole project now
let's get started with our PowerBI
project all right friends so now I'm
really glad to present you the nightmare
data set that you're going to use for
this project. Have a look to this
beautiful chaos because my friends there
is high chance if you join a company
join PowerBI projects that their data
model looks exactly like this. I have
seen this in many projects where the
data model makes no sense. You cannot
see like star schema here many to many
relationships between tables. The filter
direction is like everywhere and that's
all because people skip the data
modeling step. They just connect the
source systems to PowerBI and jump
immediately to the visuals to the report
dashboards. They just want to build
fancy reports for the end users. But of
course, after a while once they start
sharing the dashboards, the users can
understand all the numbers makes no
sense. They usually come back to this
model and start fixing the data model in
order to bring better numbers. So my
friends what I have done for the
preparations I brought all the scenarios
from my projects and build this
nightmare data set in order to cover all
the scenarios that you might face in the
projects. So our goal is to turn this
into a healthy star schema bring correct
numbers and as well has good
performance.
Okay. So now we're going to start with
the phase number one the preparation.
That means first we have to have good
understanding about the content of those
tables. So what is the business? What
are the entities? which tables are good
candidates for dimensions which are for
facts. So basic understanding about what
we have and we don't have like to deep
dive into each small detail just to
develop a feeling about the business
about the data and after that we're
going to do like few setups in the power
query as a preparation for the project.
So now let's start let's understand what
we have here and I will not go through
all the relationships because we're
going to break the data model and anyway
we have like to build the relationships
again. So just basic understanding of
the tables and we can do that by going
to the table view. So we're going to
start from the top to the addresses. So
what do we have here? We have an address
ID, street, city name. So it's all about
the geographic, the addresses, and maybe
for the customers or something. So this
is for the first table. Let's go to the
second one, the campaign log. Okay, this
one is a little bit bigger. So here we
have the campaign name, the channel,
start date, end date, a budget,
impressions, click and spend. So it's
all about our marketing campaign day by
day. So this looks like an event and
this is really good candidate for a
fact. So we have numbers, we have dates.
Now let's go to the third one. We have
the campaign SKUs. This one looks
compacted. So we have the campaign name
again and for each campaign we have like
a list and I think those are the
products that we have in the business.
So that means this table shows us what
are the products that were involved in
the campaign. And of course this is not
easy one to consume because the list is
usually bad for reporting. And we can
see as well the column names are not
correct and we can find them in the
first row inside our table. Of course we
have to clean those up. Now let's go to
another table the cities. So what do you
have here? We have again the cities and
as well the regions. So this is again a
part of the informations about the
geography, the locations, the addresses.
This is of course descriptive
informations and we're going to need
those stuff as a dimensions. Now let's
go to the next one. We have the custom
master. So it looks like this is our
customer table. So we have customer ID,
customer name, segments, the address ID.
So this is the first connection to our
addresses. Then we have like people, the
account manager, payment terms, some
hash keys and source ids. Those stuff
comes from the sources. But now look at
this. The customer name is not actually
like a person. They are companies. Like
here for example, we have the Atlas
industries. So that means this is a very
important table for the customers and
our business is B2B. So that's all for
this one. Let's go to the next one. We
have the customer contacts. So what do
we have here? We have again the customer
ID, the contact name, the emails is
primary. Now you can see for each
customer like for each company we have
multiple contacts which makes sense of
course because our customers are
companies and usually we have to deal
with multiple people in the same
company. So this is all about who we
talk inside each company. Let's go to
the next one. We have a dimension order.
So this one looks really garbage. We
have only one column and no context to
it. So we have some kind of ids that
actually we cannot relate to anything so
far. So I think this is junk. This is
something that we could drop. So we just
faced our first garbage inside the data
model. Let's go to the next one. We have
the exchange rate. So what do we have
here? We have the currency, the rate and
as well the dates. So this is as well
information about our business. Let's
keep going to the inventory. So now what
do we see here? We see the product names
and for each month we have like numbers.
So this is all about the inventory. So
that means how much stock we are holding
month by month. And here we have like a
whole year. So for each month we have
one column. All right. Let's move to the
next one. we have the invoice lines. So
here we have like an invoice line, an
invoice ID, product and amount. So that
means we have invoices in our system and
those are the details about each
invoice. And that brings us to the next
table, the invoices. And here we see
like the master table for the invoices.
So we have the invoice ID, the order ID,
the customer name, the invoice date and
the amount as well. So this looks an
event a good candidate for a fact table.
So it is connecting to other things like
the invoice ID, the order ID, the
customer name to the customer table. We
have a date and numbers. And if we need
more details about the invoices, we have
the other table that we just checked the
invoice lines. So we just spotted
another fact. Now let's move to the next
one. We have the order line items. So
again sounds similar to the invoices. We
have the details about each order. So
for each order we have like lines and
order ID and this time we are connecting
to the product names. So finally we see
here the products and then we have here
some numbers like the quantity, the
price, the costs, discount and total
sales. So those are the details for each
line. Now we're going to go to the
orders. So we have here two orders where
the orders are splitted by the year. So
for 2025 we have here a lot of things.
So here we have an order ID, a legacy
reference, customer name, customer city,
region. So again we have like some
repetitions inside our data set to which
city we're going to ship, to which city
we're going to pill. So we have here
different cities. Then we have the date,
the order date, the order channel and a
lot of columns in this table. So again
this looks like a big table for a fact
because here we have an events. Each
line is about an order but as well at
the same time we have a lot of context
inside these facts. So this is a
gigantic one for the 2025 and I think
the 2026 looks exactly the same. So they
are just getting splitted. All right. So
this is our third fact I believe but
inside it we have a lot of dimensions
that we could extract. Now let's go to
the next one. We have the payments. So
this one is small one. We have the
payment ID, the invoice ID, customer
name, date and amount. Again looks like
transactions events. So this sounds like
a fact table as well. And now to the
next one which is really important the
products. Finally we have a dimension.
So what do you have over here? We have
the product code, the name, the brand,
the subcategory, the price and many
other descriptions for the products. So
this table holds the context for the
business products which is a classical
one for a dimension. Let's go to the
next one. We have the regions. Well,
again we have informations about the
region and as you can see we are
operating globally, North America,
Europe, Asia. So our business is
everywhere. Now let's go to the next
one. We have the sales targets. So we
have a row for each month and as well
the target revenue. So it looks like
someone planned the budget the revenue
for each month. And this is a classical
use case where we're going to compare
the target to the actual sales that we
have in the transactions. So for sure
we're going to need this. Now let's go
to the next one. We have the security.
This is really important one. So here we
can see the user email and the region.
So we can see each employee which region
they are responsible to. And of course,
this is a perfect table that we're going
to use in order to build the role level
security. So, we have to keep our eyes
on it. Now, let's go to the next one. We
have the sheet one. Weird name, right? I
think this is like something wrong here.
So, we have the shipment ID, order ID,
mode, ship day, delivery date. So, all
informations about the delivery. So, we
can see for each step how and when
orders get out. Okay, interesting one.
But we have to rename the table. Now,
let's go to the next one. We have the
shipments. Well, those two tables are
identical. And yes, I think the sheet
one is an import problem. And this is a
classical thing that happens inside the
data model that you have like two tables
that are identical and you have to get
rid one of them. So this is not really
good. Now let's go to the subcategories.
So very simple one. We have here like
mapping between the category and the
subcategory. Of course, this is going to
help us in order to organize our
products later. Now let's go to the last
table, the user details. So we can see
here for each user we have like credit
limits and a phone number. Well, of
course, this is confusing which user we
are talking about. I think this going to
be for the customers. If you go and
check the customer master. Well, yes, we
have like the same patterns in the ID.
So, those are more details for the
customers. So, that means in the data
sets we are using like two names.
Sometimes users, sometimes like
customers. Of course, we have to deal
with that. All right, my friends. So,
that's it. We just visited all the
tables. We developed like a feeling
about the business. What are the
entities? What are good candidate for
dimensions? Of course here the big
dimension is going to be the customers
and the products and as well we have a
lot of events happening in the business.
So we have a lot of facts. We have
invoices, we have orders, we have
payments and as well we have shipments.
So campaign. So a lot of events are
happening in the business and this going
to be really interesting on how to make
a data model out of this and how to
connect things together. So as you can
see my friends this is really important
step. We have to get a feeling about the
data before we change anything. The more
you explore, the more you analyze, you
build this understanding about the data,
about the domain, and it's going to be
easier for you later to understand the
grain and how to build the dimensions
and facts. The more you invest in this
phase, the less errors and mistakes
you're going to do in the data moduling.
Now, of course, I have done this quickly
because I have built this data sets. But
I really recommend you to pause the
video and go through them one by one.
Understand its contents. If you have
done this already, now we're going to go
and do a last step in this phase where
we're going to prepare the power query
because we're going to work a lot with
the power query in order to shape the
data model. Not everything going to be
like connected. We have sometimes to
merge, append, and as well clear some
quality issues. So now let's go to power
query. As usual, we go to transform
data. Now, of course, in this phase, we
will not go now and transform or change
any table. All what we want is to just
organize it because the thing is as you
start like building the data model you
will be creating new tables references
and quickly the queries over here going
to go in chaos. So you will not remember
which tables are the source table which
tables are the new one that you just
created. So this going to get out of
hand quickly especially if you have like
big model like this. Now of course there
is like no best practices how to
organize your projects but I'm going to
show you how I usually do it. So
everyone does it in their own way on
their own style but this is how I like
to do it. So I start by creating a new
group. So new one and we're going to
give it a name. So I like like numbering
the folders just to sort it on the left
side. So the first one going to be the
stage. So the stage going to be the
folder that going to contain all the row
queries as it is from the source
systems. So that means my friends all
those queries that we see now on the
left side going to be inside this
folder. So that I know okay all the row
stuff are living inside this folder.
with that we don't mix it with new
tables that we generate. So let's go and
create it. Now you can see PowerBI put
everything under other queries which is
a good thing. Now I'm going to go and
select everything and drag and drop them
on the new folder. So this my new folder
the stage contains all the row sources.
So this is the first folder. We're going
to go and create another one and we're
going to call it two dimensions. Now,
this is going to be an empty folder for
now because we're going to put inside it
the new dimensions that we create from
the stage like the customers, the
products and so on. So, that means if I
want to go and do something for the
dimensions, I go immediately inside this
folder and I'm going to see it. Now,
usually after I build the dimensions,
I'm going to go and build the facts.
That's why the third one going to be the
fact folder. So, same thing any fact
that I build from the stage, it's going
to land inside the folder facts. Of
course, you can go and put them together
like maybe call it the data model where
the prefix is going to decide for you
whether it's fact or dimension. But I
like to split it like this in order to
have like a quick access. Now we're
going to go and create a last one. So a
new group, we're going to call this for
support. Now in our data model, we're
going to have some tables that don't
belong to dimensions and facts. Like for
example, the security stuff or maybe
some like data that we insert. So
anything that don't belong to dimensions
and facts going to go to this folder,
the supports. Now you might ask okay why
do we have the support if we have like
another folder called others right we
could use it as well but the other
queries has different job so in case we
connected any new tables any new sources
to our data model it going to land
inside the other queries they are like
tables that are in my to-do list that I
have to work on so my friends this is
how I usually organize my power query in
order to build the data model out of the
row tables now look at this we have 23
tables inside the stage and nothing
inside other tables of Of course, as we
progress in the project, we're going to
take all those tables and put them
inside the different folders. We have to
grab all those stuff and start building
the data model. All right, friends. So,
that's what for the phase one. We have
now basic understanding about the
content, the tables, and we have
prepared our projects to start building.
Finally, we're going to kick off the
phase two where we start building the
[music] dimensions.
This is how we're [music] going to do
it. So, we're going to have like a loop.
We're going to go through each dimension
where we're going to grab a group of
tables that describes the same thing. So
the same entity. So all tables that have
the same context for something like a
customer. So what we're going to do,
we're going to go and pull them
together, reshape them into one clean
dimension if it's possible. And we're
going to do whatever it takes. So we're
going to split, merge, append, fix, drop
until we get the shape of a dimension.
And of course before we move on to the
next one we have to polish the dimension
to make sure that we are following the
standards that we agreed on the starts.
So the snake case names the table names
the prefixes the suffixes everything.
Once it is polished then we go to the
next dimension. So my friends this is
the whole loop. We pick tables build
clean it to the standards and then we
move to the next one. But I'm going to
warn you from now you might find
yourself that you are repeating the same
steps over and over for each dimension.
And guess what? This is the part of the
job. This is the nature of things how we
build data modules. And with each
iterations, of course, you're going to
be faster. So now let's start building
our dimensions.
>> Let's go build an airport.
>> Okay. So now let's start with the first
dimension. And here we have to go and
pick like one topic or entity. And I'm
going to start with the big elephant in
the data model. We have the dimension
customer. So we're going to go and build
it. Now how we're going to do it? We go
and pick all the tables that are related
to the customers and turn it into one
dimension. So now based on what we have
learned we have a lot of tables but
obviously the biggest table that's going
to gives us context about the customers
is the customer master. So now what I
usually do is that in this scenario
since we have like a lot of chaos over
here it's like a basel game. I'm going
to go and grab all those tables that are
related to the same topic and move them
to one section in the model. So for
example here the table customer master
I'm going to go and grab it over here
just in order to get like feeling of
progress over the time. Now what is the
other table that actually gives us more
context about the customers? We had the
contacts. So it is over here the
customer contacts and at the end we
found like a table the user details
where we get like phones and emails as
well. This one gives us some context
about the customers. Now there is a
topic that actually could be relevant
that the addresses. Each customer has an
address. Of course here the question is
whether we make like an extra dimension
for the addresses or we merge everything
inside the customer. So I'm going to say
let's go and group them as well together
with the customers. So this is the
addresses over here and for the
addresses we saw as well some other
related tables for the locations. So we
had like the cities it is over here and
as well we had the regions. So this
could be as well interesting. So now by
looking to this we have like three
tables about the customers and three
tables about the addresses. So now I
know okay on the top right I have the
dimension customers and my goal is to go
and turn all those tables into one
single dimension. So as you can see our
data model is getting like maybe slowly
less chaotic but we are not there yet we
didn't start. So now in order to change
the shape of the tables of course we
have to go to the power query. Now in
this scenario where we have a lot of
tables I usually start with the
foundations with the biggest table
that's going to gives us a lot of
context about the customer and the one
table that let's say has a completeness
like has all the customer and I'm going
to say this is very obvious it's going
to be our customer master here we have a
lot of columns about the customers and
this is very good starting point so now
before we do anything we will not go and
change now directly the shape of this
table we have to go and make a reference
out of it so that I can work on a copy
let's say and leave the row data as it
is. Maybe later we're going to need as
well this table for something else.
That's why I usually go and say okay
let's go and build a reference out of
this. So we have it over here and then
drag and drop it to the dimensions. All
right. So now let's minimize this. The
next step we have to go and rename it.
And here we have to be really careful
with our rules. So we said we have a
prefix for each dimension called dimim.
And we are using the snake case. So
everything should be lowered. Actually
that's it. This is our first dimension.
Now let's have a look. What do we have
here? We have a lot of context about the
customers. And how many customers do we
have? We have 61 customers. And this is
really interesting. The last row is 999.
And it sounds like a test customer. So
this is like a dummy information that
came from the source system. And I'm
going to say we have to get rid of it.
So I'm going to go and filter this data
out. And we can do that very simply by
going to the filter over here and search
for the ID. And then all what you have
to do is to just unmark it. That's it.
So now by looking to this we have 60
customers inside this table. This is the
foundations. We have to keep this in our
mind because as we start adding more and
more things to this table we have to
make sure that everything stay unique
and we stay with the 60 customers. So
now we have the foundations. Now let's
go and look to the other tables. So we
have the customer contacts. Over here we
have the ID, the name, the email and is
primary. So we have here more context
about the customers. And of course it
makes sense to go and put those
informations side by side with the other
context. So with the dimension customer
and how we do that we go and merge the
two tables. So it is very simple. We're
going to go to the dimension customers
and say okay let's merge the queries
together. So dimension customer and the
next one it's going to be the customer
contacts. The ID going to be the
customer ID and the left join. Make sure
it is always left. If you use inner you
might lose data from the main dimension.
We don't want that. So okay. Now we get
it like a new column over here. we have
to expand and select exactly what do we
need. So we need the name, the email and
is primary. So with this we got our
three columns side by side with the
other context. Now it is very important
once you add once you merge new data
inside your table you have to make sure
that everything stay correct. That means
the data is not fanning out or let's say
getting duplicated. Now if you go and
check here we had 60 customers but now
as I scroll down we have way more than
60 customers and that's because the same
ID is keep repeating over and over and
of course that's all because the new
merge table that we have attached to
this table. So that was a really bad
merge between those two tables and this
is exactly what you have to be careful
but merging is not destroying your
dimension or maybe your facts. Now of
course the question is why did this
happen? Because my friends we are
merging two tables with different
grains. So again the customer contacts
each row doesn't represent one customer.
Each row is representing one contact for
the customer. So here for example for
the second customer we have four
contacts. So the grain is different from
the customer master. Here each row is
really representing only one customer.
And once you merge different grains you
get this bad effect. So now of course
the question is how we going to solve
this? Well there is like different ways
on how to do it. You can say you know
what we can go and convert this table
into the grain of customer. So that
means each row represent one customer
and what do we do with the contacts? We
make like a list of contacts. It's like
we are grouping up or let's say
aggregating this table to the level of
the customer. And of course we can do
that if you go to the transform and then
group by the columns by the customer ID.
Another solution that you might say, you
know what, this is the contact of the
customers and we can make another
dimension out of it and then make a
relationship between this new dimension
and the customer. Or a third solution
that you might say, you know what, let's
not go and add all the contacts inside
the customer dimension. Let's just add
the primary contacts. So for example,
for the second customer, we have here
like four people only one of them Sara
is actually the primary contact for this
customer. And if that is okay for the
analyzes and the reports then we can go
and merge actually this table to the
customers again. But of course we have
to make sure that we really have like
one primary contact for each customer.
We can do that by filtering the data.
For example over here and say show me
only the primary contact. So of course
this dimension is very small. You can go
and check like by eyes and see with this
I have exactly 60 customers and I don't
have like any duplicates in the primary
key. So now again my grain over here is
one row is one customer and the
relationship between the customer
contacts and the dimension customer is
again one one and this is very safe in
order to do a merge. So now since we
filter the data like this let's go and
check our dimension customer. Now let's
see again we have here a clean dimension
where we have only 60 customers and on
the right side of course we have our
primary contacts for each customer. So
with this finally it is safe to merge
those two tables into one. Now of course
we are just checking by looking right
whether there's duplicates or not. There
is like smarter way on how to do it that
you go to the primary key the customer
ID and you group up the data by the
rows. So you say here group by and you
just say okay count and here the
operation going to be count rows. So if
you go and say okay of course the data
going to get grouped up by the rows and
if you see it like this where the count
is everywhere is one then my friend you
don't have any duplicates and you are
okay. Of course you can go and check for
here and you can see okay we have only
one value the one. So this is something
that I do each time I merge two tables
together to check quickly whether we
have duplicates or not but of course
this is only for checking. So I'm going
to go and remove it. All right so that's
what the first lesson be careful for the
grains if you are merging things
together. Now let's go and check the
third table. We had the user details
right now again we have more context to
the dimension customer. We have the
limits and the phone. That's we have to
go and merge those informations to our
new dimension. But this time we have to
be careful. Do we have here the same
grain? Well, by looking to this, I'm
going to say we don't have here any
duplicates. Each row representing one
customer. So this one going to be really
easy. I'm going to go to the table
customers. Same thing. We're going to go
home and then merge find our table was
at the end. So user details. Now things
here getting interesting about the
entity. We have here the user ID. But in
other table they call it user ID. We
have of course to talk about this
because we have now like two different
names for the same entity right but
first let's go and merge things together
and of course we have to expand so we
just need the new informations credit
limit and the phone and again before we
celebrate having more data inside our
dimension we have to go and check
whether everything is unique and we
don't have duplicates so looks really
good now before we continue with the
other tables and building the dimension
I still don't like it that we found out
inside our data we have like two names
for the same entity we had the customer
and as well the user. So of course what
is the true? How we going to call this
dimension customer or dimension user?
This happens a lot of course by the way
in the companies where you have
different departments calling the same
entity different names. In one
department they call all the customers
as users and other is customer. So of
course this is always a dilemma as you
are building a data model especially if
you are connecting like multiple sources
inside one model inside your project.
Now of course one idea could be let's go
and ask the business users who are using
the report which name they want to use.
Now the thing is if you are asking a
business user from specific department
they might say you know what we use
customers then I want to see it in the
report as well as customers. But if you
go and ask another department another
business they might say use the user. So
still it is dilemma and they will not
really help you in order to decide for
your data model. You cannot go and use
both of them. That's why you have to
have like feeling about the data model.
If you have a lot of tables are using
the customer as an info, then go with
the customer. Like here in our example,
most of our tables are using this term
customer and only like one table is
using the user. That's why I'm going to
decide for our data model to go with the
customer as an entity name and let's say
ignore the user as a term. So now let's
go back. So that means we're going to
stick with the name dimension customer.
We will not rename anything. Now let's
go back to the other three tables. Now
the next batch of tables, they are all
to do with the addresses. Look at this.
We have here the address ID. And now
here my friend, you have two options.
Either you're going to go and build a
new dimension called addresses and then
connected to the dimension customer. And
with that you are actually building
remember the snowflake schema one
dimension connect and branch to another
dimension or we're going to stick with
our goal where we are building the star
schema. So we always try to fit
everything together into one dimension
and only in extreme cases we might go
and branch. So of course I'm going to
stick with the goal. We are building
star schema. That means all the address
informations going to go inside the
dimension customer. And don't worry, we
can always go and split if things goes
wrong. So that means we have now to go
and merge more and more things to the
dimension customer. And I would like to
show you one trick that I usually use in
order to feel safe before merging things
together. Yes, you can go and count
things after merging, but usually I go
to the module layer. So, first save.
Yeah. Okay. Close and apply before going
to the model view. Now, look at this.
This is our new dimension that we are
actually building all the time. And you
can see that PowerBI is always trying to
connect a new table to the whole data
model. Of course, we have to remove all
those stuff and start from a scratch,
but don't worry about it. Now, now the
thing is if I have like a new table that
I would like to merge it to the table
customers, I go and check the cardality.
Like for example, we want to merge the
addresses with the dimension customer.
Right? Now you can see we have already
like a relationship between those two.
Now if I see the cardality is one to one
relationship between those two tables.
Then this is really safe to merge those
two tables together because PowerBI
automatically check the values inside
those two tables and detect the
cardinality. And of course this is a
great indicator for me to say nothing
going to go wrong if I go and like merge
those two tables together. So this is a
good thing. And by the way about the
cardality if the relationship is one to
many so from the addresses is one and in
the dimension customer is many it is
still safe. So there's another way to
check before let's say merging two
tables together. Let's go back to power
query. So now same thing let's go to the
dimension customer. We're going to go
and merge and here we're going to search
for the addresses. This time the ID
going to be the address ID as well. Here
address ID always left join never inner
join. If you have one missing address
then you are removing a whole customer.
So this is not safe. We always use lift
join and same things. So we're going to
go ahead and expand. We just need the
street and the city name. So look at
this. Looks nice. Now of course we have
to go and test. So do we have 60
customers? Well yes. So merging the
addresses didn't cause any harm any
issues. Now what else do we have? We
have the cities right? So let's go over
here. Now what do we have here? We have
the city name and the region name. But
here we have equality issue. You can see
that the first row is actually the
column names and not the column one and
column two. Now in order to fix this,
this is very simple. We have here in the
repon use first row as headers. So
probably are going to go and promote the
first header as the column name for the
table. So this is very simple. Look at
this. We have now the city name and the
region name. Now again what we're going
to do, we're going to go and merge this
inside our dimension customer. Again as
I told you, you can go and check whether
we have a one relationship at this
table. So we have it over here the
cities. Let's go and grab it. I'm going
to go and remove this relationship and
then try to connect it to the dimension
customer. This of course only for test.
So I'm going to take the city name to
the city name. All right. Look at this
one to many relationship. So at the side
of the cities we have one. So I'm going
to get good feeling about it in order to
merge those two tables together. We
don't have many. This will not duplicate
my customers. So that means we're going
to go back to transform data. So again
we merge. And as you can see I'm merging
all the time and I will keep doing that.
So let's go and connect our cities. So
city name and the city name is somewhere
over here. So let's go and connect left
join. Now what do we need from this
table is actually only the region name.
We have already city name. So we
actually don't need it twice inside our
dimension. And we're going to go and
check we have 60 customers. All right.
Now to the last table. We have the
regions. Well here we have only one
column. We don't have like a lot of
context that's going to help us for the
dimension customer. And the region
information we have it already. So it
makes no sense to merge this table to
the dimension customers. This
information is already in our dimension.
So as you can see we have here the
regions. So actually this makes no sense
to merge inside our dimension customer.
It will not add any value or add any
context. And this is of course one of
the things that happens all the time
inside the data models. You're going to
find the same piece of information
multiple times in multiple tables. So
the region exists here and as well in
the cities and maybe in another table
that we didn't discover yet. So here we
have to be very careful. We are not like
repeating the same data over and over
otherwise we are confusing the data
model. So my friends we went through the
six tables and we have now one gigantic
table that holds all the context about
the customers. And so that was big step.
We have compiled now six tables into one
dimension customers. But we are not done
yet. We will not go to the second
dimension until we do my favorite step.
We have to do the housekeeping. So we
have to clean up, organize and make sure
that we are following the standards. So
we polish everything in order to make
the dimension is ready to get used in
the data model. So let's do that. All
right. So now the first step that we
have to do is that we have to get rid of
unnecessary informations unnecessary
columns inside the dimension. Remember
the rule each info each data should earn
its place. So that means if there is
something unnecessary we have to remove
it otherwise it's going to take space.
It's going to lead to bad performance
and as well it's going to lead to
confusion as you start building the
reports. So that means my friends now
we're going to go through all the
columns inside our new dimension and
think about it should we leave it or
should we drop it. So the customer ID
for sure it's going to stay the customer
name the segments all those informations
are important for filtering and slicing
and building visuals. Now to the address
ID well my friends I believe we don't
need it. I can't imagine that this going
to be necessary for reporting only for
connecting things. And we have decided
to put everything together into one
dimension. We are not making snowflake.
That's why I'm going to go and drop it.
So remove the account manager. Okay. The
payment terms going to stay. Now the
hash keys. Well my friends, those stuff
comes from the source system. And I will
never imagine that we're going to need
this for reporting. That's why we're
going to go and remove. By the way, this
takes a lot of space inside the data
model. I remember in one project we had
like for each table one hash key where
the refresh time for the data model was
really horrible. It took a lot of time
and all because those hash keys they are
string values and they are really big
and if you have millions of rows imagine
how much space this takes. So the fix
was very simple to just go and drop all
those hash keys and suddenly we saved
around I think 20% of the data set. So
now let's go and remove the hash key.
Then we have source ID. This is as well
some garbage from the source system. We
would never use this. Now here we have
the primary contacts. Okay we have their
email. Now whether it is primary well
this can be always true right we use
this as a filter so that means actually
this is like totally useless information
and we would never use this so let's go
and remove it limits going to stay the
phone the street the city name and the
region so not that bad right we just
dropped like around four columns all
right so this is the first step that
we're going to do in order to clean up
our dimension now comes the naming
convention as you can see we are not
following the standards only the table
name is actually using the camel case
but all the columns are actually
following another case. This we call it
the Pascal case where we don't have any
separations and the first letter is
capitalized. Now of course since we have
committed to the snake case we have to
go and rename all the columns or you can
say you know what since everything is
like Pascal case I'm going to go and
change the rules but of course you have
to stick to it and we're going to follow
the Pascal case. Well, this is something
that you decide. But I have decided for
the snake case and I'm going to go and
now rename everything to the standards.
But of course, I'm going to speed up. So
I'll just do it for the first column for
you. So this going to be the customer ID
and this going to be customer name,
right? Like this. So now see you soon.
All right. So now to the last column. As
you can see here, we have the cities dot
region name. We don't need the cities
dot because this is just comes from the
original table, the cities. We're just
going to go and call it region. That's
it. So I'm going to say everything is
clean inside our dimensions. The names
are friendly. So the table name, the
column names and as well the values
inside the table. This is really
important. If you see something critical
technical, we have to do something about
it. Now I'm going to say our dimension
customer is ready to use. But now of
course before we close and go to the
second dimension, we have the last last
step where we're going to go and hide
all the original tables so that we don't
see them anymore inside the model. So
we're going to go through them one by
one. the addresses we don't need it
anymore. So we will deactivate the
enable load. So yes, same thing for the
customer master. So we have to do the
whole thing for all six tables. The
cities. So deactivated the contract as
well here. The regions. Well, actually
we didn't merge it, but we don't need
it. We have this information already in
the dimension customer. And the last
one, the user details. So right click
and disable. Okay. So with this, we have
consolidated a lot of things into one
dimension. Let's go and close and apply.
Well, look at this. Everything gone and
I have only the dimension customer. Now,
I'm going to go and clean up those
relationships. I don't need them. So,
remove, remove, and last remove. So, now
comes the most satisfying like thing
that I'm going to do. We're going to
zoom out and look at this. Our data
model get reduced little bit. And now we
have here one good solid dimension. So,
my friends, this is the first dimension.
And I'm going to say this is the biggest
dimension that we have inside this row
data model. We have of course to keep
iterating on this. And the next big
dimension of course in our business the
products. And now again the same
iteration we start by collecting all the
tables that has to do with the products.
We had very big table called products
where we have a lot of context about it.
So I'm going to drag it over here. And
the second table that actually has to do
with the products that was the
subcategories. I don't find it. Well
yeah it's over here. So this one going
to organize the product. And I think by
looking to this actually that's it. So
we have only two table to do with the
product. We're going to go and try to
merge everything into new dimension
called them product. So let's go and do
that. We're going to go again to the
power query. All right. So now our two
tables are again the products and the
subcategories. Now of course we have to
start one of them as the foundations.
It's going to be the products of course
because here we have a lot of context.
This is the master table for our
dimension. So as usual. So what you
going to do? Same thing. We're going to
go and create a reference out of it.
Drag and drop it to the dimensions. Let
me just make this smaller. And we're
going to go and rename it. Same thing.
The prefix is dimension and the name is
product. Okay. So now let's have a quick
look to our dimension products. As you
can see, we have a lot of columns
describing as well. We have a lot of
things that we're going to clean up at
the end. But of course, we have to
understand how many products do we have.
Well, same thing. We have 60 products.
And the last one we have as well a dummy
data. So it says don't use test blah
blah blah. But that means this is
something from the source. We're going
to go and remove it quickly. So uncheck
it. And other thing that let's make sure
that we don't have duplicate inside the
product. So we can do a quick group I
group by. So count rows. Okay. Now we
check this. Do we have any twos? Well,
only one. So this is clean. We don't
have any duplicates inside our products.
But now you might notice that we don't
have actually a product ID. We have a
product code. So that means the source
table is not providing like a unique
identifier in order to connect it to the
data model. It is using the code as like
a business key. This is of course a
tricky thing. So now we will not clean
anything yet. Let's go and check the
subcategories. So the subcategories is
over here. Now the first issue with that
we don't have the column name. So what
we're going to do we're going to use the
first row as headers. And the second
issue actually here we are merging two
informations in one column. We have the
category and the subcategory side by
side and they are separated with a pipe.
Now of course we have the subcategories
already in the dimension products. So we
have it over here. But what is missing
which is very important is the category.
So that means we need the category in
order to add more context to this
dimension and we have somehow to grab it
from this column. Now of course we
cannot go and merge this directly to the
product because we don't have keys. The
keys are actually like piece of
information inside each value. That's
why we have to go and split this into
two columns. One category and another
one subcategory. So let's go and do
that. So here we have a nice function
called split columns by delimiter. So
here PowerBI get it correctly. We are
splitting by custom and the separator is
the pipe. So actually everything is
ready. Let's go and hit okay. Look at
this. Now we have the categories and the
subcategories. I'm going to go and
rename things because here it says one
and two. PowerBI has no idea about the
content. So this going to be the
category and the other one going to be
the subcategory. Now we are not there
yet because if you look at this you see
that all the subcategories all the
values are lowered. But if you check our
dimension over here you see the key is
not ready yet. We have it capitalized.
So the first letter is actually an
uppercase and this will not work. So if
I go and merge now things together
PowerBI will not find any match. So as
you can see we have always like to
prepare the data before merging. The
keys must work otherwise you're going to
get only nulls after merging. So now
either we're going to make this lowerase
or we go over there and we make the key
as a capitalize. I'm going to change it
over here in the reports. It looks way
nicer if you have things capitalized. So
how we going to do it? We're going to go
to transform and here we have a nice
function called capitalize each word. So
let's do it. Now our key is ready for
the merge. So everything now is simple.
We're going to go to the dimension
products. As usual we merge. We go and
pick our table. So it is the
subcategories over here. And now all
what we have to do is to just select
things. So subcategory with the
subcategory and let's join. So let's go
and set okay. All right. We have it here
as a table. We have to expand. Well, we
don't need the subcategory. We have it
already. We just need the category. So
okay, now it is working. As you can see,
we have now the categories inside our
table. All right. So now with this, I'm
going to say that our dimension now hold
all the context about the products in
one table. We don't have anything else
from the other tables. Now we're going
to come back to this topic where I said
we don't have like an ID from the source
system. We just have like a code and a
name. So it's not like the dimension
customer we had here like an ID. Now
here we have like two options. Either
we're going to leave it as it is or
we're going to go and create a surrogate
key something that we create inside the
model not from the business. And we're
going to use this ID in order to connect
it to the facts in the future. So I'm
going to say for now I'm going to go and
add it. So we're going to go and add
column and we just go and add an index
column and we start from one. So we have
it over here. I'm going to go and rename
it. So this going to be not the product
ID. This going to be the product
underscore key. We agreed in the rules
if you are creating any keys from us. We
always have the suffix underscore key
for it. So that I know which ids come
from the source and which one that I
created. So it looks like this. And we
have like 60 products. Now I'm going to
say we are done with merging and
creating things. Let's go to the last
step where we start like cleaning up and
bringing standards to this dimension. So
that means again we're going to go
through all the columns one by one and
say whether they going to stay or leave.
So the code of course going to stay the
name, the brand, the subcategory, the
prices, the supplier. We could use it
for slicer. Now comes something that I
saw a lot in data models where people
just leave such information here. So
those are the big text, the
descriptions. Now this is of course a
huge text. It is describing each
product. And of course, we have to ask
ourselves, do we really going to go and
[clears throat] use such a description
inside our reports? In most cases, no.
We are not building like an operative
system. We are not building an interface
in order to show the descriptions of the
products. We are building analytics and
reports. And in most cases, we don't go
and use product descriptions and long
text in the visuals. But of course in
the other hand I saw a lot of people
that are using PowerBI in order to build
some kind of application let's say to
see all the data. Well there's like some
projects that are misusing PowerBI in
order to build interfaces but not BI
right so in most cases I refuse to have
such informations inside the data model
that means we go and drop it. So remove
now same thing we have here hash key the
source ID all those informations came as
garbage let's say from the source system
and we don't need it here. Of course,
there are maybe very important
informations in the source systems, but
here we don't need it. So, let's go and
remove it. Now, here we have our
category and the product ID. Now, before
we start like renaming everything, I
would like to go and sort the columns.
So, I would like to see the product key
at the start as like primary key and the
category. I would like to have it side
by side with the subcategory. Well, I'm
going to say subcategory and then
category. So, that like we have
hierarchy, right? The product then
subcategory and then category. I like to
have things ordered so it makes sense as
you are building visuals and reports.
And now I'm going to say we have all
useful informations and we can go now
and start renaming things. Again I'm
going to do it now offline in order not
to waste time. So see you soon.
All right. So this is the last column
and with that we are following now the
same naming convention. Sometimes I
remove few things like for example the
subcategory name. I call it now
subcategory. So there is no need for the
name inside the column name. Now there
is one more thing by looking to the
values you can see that the subcategory
is actually capitalized. Same thing for
the product name only the category is
everything here lowercased and this of
course because it comes from another
table where everything is lowered. So
now in order to like to bring standards
to the values I'm going to go and apply
the same function. So transform and
capitalize each word. So now things
looks like more harmonized everything
capitalized and maybe we can add it as a
rule inside our project where we say all
the text values inside our data model is
capitalized so that people once they
start building reports they don't have
to go back to the data model and start
like adding more functions and
transformations. All right so now we
have really nice dimension as well. The
last step that we're going to do we will
just go and deactivate the row tables.
So the products we will go and
deactivate it. Yes. Same thing for the
subcategory as well. It is deactivated.
All right. So, we are done. Let's go and
make sure that we save and apply. All
right. Now, this is our new dimension
over here. Let me just zoom in. We're
going to go and remove the
relationships. We don't need them. And
for this as well. So now look at this.
Now we have clean two dimensions are
waiting here on the side. And our
original data model is getting cleaned
up step [music] by step.
Okay. So now what is next? What we going
to do? Do we have like a third dimension
that we're going to go and build? Of
course, there will be a lot of
dimensions, but here we have like
something that we have to decide on.
Now, the products and the customers,
they were like standalone and very
obvious dimensions where we had like a
master table for them. So, we have like
table products and another table called
the customer master. That's why it was
really easy to make those dimensions out
of those row tables. But now the thing
is in all other tables that are
remaining in the data model, most of
them are events. So we don't have like a
master table for the third dimension.
Actually most of the dimensions going to
get like extracted out of the event. As
we said before in many facts there are
always like hidden sneaky dimensions
that we extract out of it. This is
exactly now the scenario because of this
now we have like two ways on how to
continue. Either you're going to go
through all the events one by one and
start like extracting all the dimensions
and once you are done once you have all
the dimensions then you start building
the facts or the other way that I prefer
that at the same time we take like one
event table and we split it into fact
and dimensions. So at the same time we
are building the fact and the dimensions
out of the row tables and we don't have
like to redisuss it and brainstorm it
again. So either you go all the way by
extracting all the dimensions and only
after that you build the facts or at the
same time you are building the
dimensions and facts. Well I tend to the
second option. So now let's go and do
that. All right. So now by looking back
to our data model we have actually a lot
of events. So we have the orders and
sales, we have the invoices, the
payments, the campaigns and of course
it's going to be really hard to think of
everything at the same time. That's why
we have to go and pick one event, go
deep inside it and start splitting it
into facts and dimensions. So that means
we have to go and pick an event. I'm
going to say we're going to start with
the orders and sales. This is the most
important one and I think this is a
little bit complicated. So now let's go
and collect all the related tables like
we have done in the dimensions together
in one place. So we have the orders 2026
and as well we have the same table for
the 2025. What else do we have? We have
as well the lines for the orders. So
this one over here the sales target it's
going to be the budget. So I'm going to
say it's not really same event. It is
like the planned budget for each month.
We're going to think about it. Maybe
we're going to consider it. So I'm going
to say this is more than enough. We have
a lot of things. We have the orders and
the lines. And here we have to have full
focus because we start talking about
facts. Facts are very sensitive topic.
So again we're going to go to the power
query. Let's go inside. Now the first
thing before we start touching anything,
let's have some understanding more about
our tables. So let's start with those
two orders. So 2025 and 2026. Now again
I'm going to ask the question of the
grain what each row is representing.
Well you can see over here each row is
actually one complete order. So we have
all the informations about the orders.
We have the customer name, city, region
looks like dimension, right? But of
course we have here the events, the
order date, the channel of the order,
the status, priority, total sales for
the order and some big notes. Now let's
go to the other table. The orders 2025.
This is very identical table. So
actually here we have a split from the
source system. Here as well we have the
same grain. Each row is actually one
order but again the source system is
splitting the data maybe for some
reasons like archive and so on. And of
course we have to do something about it.
We cannot leave it splitted like this.
It just confused the data model. Now
let's go to the third one the order line
items. So now again the same question.
What each row here is representing? Well
I'm going to say each row is actually a
line of order. So one line is not the
whole order like we had it in the other
tables. It is one position about the
order and of course we can go and check
that by aggregating the order ID. So
let's just group by and say okay this is
the count of rows. Well by looking at
this you can see here we have a lot of
duplicates. That means for each order we
might have like multiple lines like here
for the first order we have three lines.
All right. So I will just go and remove
it. We are just testing here. So that
means this has like more details another
grain than the orders. Now my friends
here we have like a very classical
scenario with the order lines and the
orders. This is something that recall
from the transactional systems from the
sources the headers and the details. All
right friends now I can say we come to
the most complicated and confusing part
in the whole data modeling project
that's why if you don't have cavettes go
and grab one.
Okay so now we're going to talk about
the header and the details. This is very
tricky and confusing part where a lot of
people make mistakes in the data
modeling for reporting and analytics but
yet one of the best practices and the
common way on how to store transactions
in OLTB sources. So it is a very common
way on how to module the sources and
you're going to find it a lot in many
companies. So my friends, if you
understand this concept and you know how
to deal with it in the data modeling for
business intelligence and analytics,
then my friends, your life going to be
really easy working at companies because
you're going to face this data model
over and over. So now in order to
understand this, let's start with very
simple example. I don't know, look
around you. Maybe you find an order or
an invoice.
>> I found it. If not, go and check online
your stuff. So now here I have an order
and if I look at this, this is one
business event. I have done an order and
this business event actually has like
two sections a header and details. The
header it is like the top level
informations in the order like for
example I have the address, the
customer, the company, the order number,
the order state, the order dates. So all
those informations we have it like only
once for each order right and those are
my friends the header. Now if you look
below it depends if you ordered multiple
things you're going to find like a table
with more details like for example
you're going to find the list of all
products that you have ordered in this
one order and other things like the
quantity the price and as well the final
costs and my friends this setup the
header and the details you're going to
find it in many events in many
companies. So you're going to find it in
orders, in invoices, in shipment, in
delivery. Even in manufacturing, you're
going to have the bill of materials, the
production order, or if you have like
ticketing system, you're going to find
it as well in tickets. All those
transactions and many systems going to
store those informations into header and
details. Now, of course, the big
question is how we going to deal with
those stuff inside our data model for
business intelligence. Now, one of the
biggest mistake that people do is that
they look at the header and details as
two different things. So they say okay
the header looks like a fact. So they go
and make like for example fact orders
and they see okay the details as well
looks as fact but this is like different
grains. That's why they're going to go
and make another fact for that the fact
order line. So they make out of this
like two facts. And now of course in
reporting you're going to need those two
tables in one visual in one report. So
that means they need two data from the
facts. And here people come in this trap
where they're going to say, "Okay, well
actually we have the order key in the
header and the details." This is
actually what happens in transactional
systems. They link the order with the
header using the key. And they're going
to say, "Okay, this is a perfect match.
This is the common column. I'm going to
go and connect those two facts
together." Well, yes, this might work,
but this can introduce only issues in
the reporting. This has first of all bad
performance, can lead to bad numbers,
and as well this is very confusing once
you are building the reports. So this is
one of the biggest mistakes that people
do in data modeling. And now of course
the question is how we going to do it?
How we going to model this? Well, the
rule is always the same. The fact table
going to sit always at the level of
things that you are measuring. So ask
yourself where the numbers come from. So
if you look to the header and the
details, you're going to see that
actually all the numbers are stored in
the details. The header is just like
giving us some context and maybe like
maximum one or two numbers, but the core
numbers, the core measures are in the
details. So that means it is always
better to build a fact table that comes
from the finest details from the lowest
level because my friend you can always
roll up and aggregate the data back to
the header. So that means in most cases
we're going to go and create the core
fact table from the details and we're
going to the header in order to get more
context for our new facts. So either
we're going to use it in order to
generate a new dimensions from the
header or we're going to use it as well
to connect the data model to our new
fact from the details. So this is the
very common pattern. We make fact from
the details and we use the help of the
headers in order to generate dimensions
and to connect it to our fact. And I can
say this can work like 90% of the time.
Sometimes you have some edge cases where
people are storing a lot of numbers in
the headers but in most cases this is
going to work if you follow this
pattern. Okay. Okay. So now with this I
have prepared you with the foundations.
Now let's go to PowerBI and try this
out. All right. So now what we're going
to do with those three tables I'm going
to say let's start with the easy and
obvious thing. We have to go and combine
those two orders into one single table.
So again if you have two tables have the
same grain and as well they are
identical. They have the same shape. We
go and append them. So how we going to
do it? It's going to be very simple.
We're going to go over here and say
append queries. And I'm going to go and
create a new one so that we don't lose
let's say the row tables. So now here it
says two tables and the first table I'm
going to start with the oldest. So first
2025 and then 2026. All right let's hit
okay. So now we have a new table over
here. Let's go and rename it. So this
going to be the orders. Now of course
this going to be like an intermediate
table. We don't have like fact and
dimension. We are just like merging
things. Of course if you want you can go
and make another order for all the
temporary things. But I'm going to leave
it now in the stage. Now of course we
are not done. Let's have a look to the
append whether we have any strange
things. Here we have some nulls and if I
go over here the source file has as well
some nulls. So actually there is like
something wrong and as well the legacy
reference. So that means they are not
completely identical. Let's have a look
again. We have here the legacy reference
and in 2026 we don't have it. So
actually with the new orders we don't
have this legacy column. So let's go and
remove it. It says as well legacy. So I
think we don't need it for reporting.
And let's go and check the resource
file. So over here we have it in 2025
but we don't have it I think for 2026.
So again it is a legacy thing. We go and
remove it from our new table. So you go
out remove. Now here we have a lot of
nulls. The gift message. If I go over
here you can see actually we don't have
any value. This is garbage column. So it
is just taking space. Let's go and
remove it as well. So as you can see we
are cleaning up. And since we are
talking about cleaning we have here the
order notes as well those big text. Come
on. We don't need those stuff in
analytics and reporting. So I'm going to
go and remove it as well. So I think now
we have like complete match between
those two tables. We don't have any more
nulls. So they are completely identical.
Of course you might say but we lost an
information which record come from which
table. So the 2025 and 2026. Well
actually we don't need this information.
We have it already in the order dates.
So it will be just like an extra
information that we have already. But if
it was like another information like the
country or something, I would go and add
the source. All right. So now again our
orders is the header information. As you
can see we have here a lot of context
for each order. So very good candidates
for dimensions and the order line items.
Here we have all the numbers. So this is
the detail table for the orders. And
this means my friends this going to be
our core fact table for the topic sales
and orders. So now where we're going to
start either we create the fact table
now or we start extracting the
dimensions from the orders. I'm going to
say let's go to the orders and start
like creating new dimensions. So what do
we have here? We have the customer name,
the customer city. Well, we don't create
now another dimension called customers.
So we're going to leave it like here.
Same thing for the region. Those cities
going to stay over here. The date as
well. Now here we have something
interesting. We have the order channel
where we have like some numbers. Those
are technical IDs. They are not
something that we're going to use in
order to aggregate. We have as well
status and priority. All three
informations are actually good
candidates for dimensions because we can
use them in order like to filter and
slice. Now, of course, the question is
what is the topic? Are they like related
to each others? Could we make like one
dimensions out of this? Well, they are
actually not related to each other. As
you can see here, the order channel, the
status, the priority, they are just like
confirmations for the order, but they
are not like connected together in order
to make like good dimension. And of
course, we will not go and make like one
dimensions for each column. This is not
good. In this scenario, what we're going
to do, my friends, we're going to build
the junk dimension. We're going to put
them all together in one and then
reference it back in the fact table
later. So, how we going to build a junk
dimension? We're going to go and make
another reference out of this. So, we're
going to say reference. And this going
to be a dimension. So, I'm going to drag
and drop it to the dimensions. Let me
just minimize this. All right. So, right
click on it, rename. Well, I'm not going
to call it again junk. So, this going to
be the order flags. Maybe you're going
to have another junk from another event.
That's why we will not make it like a
super generic. Now, how we build this?
It's very simple. We're going to go and
remove all the unnecessary stuff and say
okay remove. We don't need the order
total. This is a number. We don't need
it for dimension. Now, the last thing
what we're going to do, we're going to
go and remove all the duplicates from
all three. So, select all and say remove
duplicates. Very nice. We have only 14
rows. Now, of course, what is missing?
We need like a key for this dimension.
So, we're going to go and add a column,
an index column that starts from one.
Then, we're going to call it. So rename
the flag key because this is a surrogate
key. We just created this in our model
and go to the top. Okay. So this looks
already good. Now we are not done yet.
There is something that I really don't
like those order channels. So as you can
see those numbers. Now this can confuse
a lot if you just bring it to the
reporting. People might go and aggregate
or find an average of this. Those are ID
for something that we don't know and we
cannot leave it like this. We have to
make something meaningful of this. So
now at work in order to understand what
those numbers are we actually go and
read documentations or ask the people
responsible for the source system maybe
ask an expert from the business or from
the processes. So at the end you have to
find the mapping between those numbers
and the real values so that we can show
it in the reports. Now let's say that I
got it from somewhere those
informations. Now the question is how we
going to add it to this data model
because those informations are not
coming from the source. From the source
we are getting only those ids. So that
means this is new information that I'm
adding to this data model and it doesn't
exist from the sources. And how we can
do that my friends we go and add a data
inside our data model by going to the
home rippon and say enter data. So this
is going to be very simple. We are just
creating a table from scratch like an
Excel. So the first column going to be
the channel code and we need another one
where we have the full name. So the
channel name.
Okay. So it is just like mapping between
code and the name. So we make sure that
we cover everything from our data. We
have the 10 and this stands for online
store. Then we have 20. This is the
retail partner. Then the 30. This is the
channel wholesale and 40 is a field
sale. So we make sure that we have
covered everything. So we have here
actually only four. Okay. So this is the
translation the mapping between the
cryptical code and the friendly name.
All right. So now let's go and hit okay.
Well, now I have it here as a table. So
I'm going to go and rename it channels
and then maybe bring it back to the
stage because this is something like
intermediate, right? So now what we're
going to do, we're going to go back to
our order flags and we have to replace
those numbers with the new values and we
can do that by merging queries. So let's
go and find our new table channels. All
right, this is the key and left join. So
let's hit okay. All right. Okay. So
let's go and expand. Remove the code. We
just need the name and I'm going to move
it over here. Of course, you can now
decide whether you're going to leave the
code together with the name but I'm
going to say actually the codes are just
like confusing. So I'm going to go and
remove it. So now my friends this is
what we call data enhancement, data
enrichment and this is very typical
things that we do in data modeling
because in source systems we're going to
get a lot of critical things that we
cannot just go and present it in the
reports. So we have to add from our side
something new to the data model and with
this comes a really great responsibility
because this is very typical what could
happen that initially going to go and
start mapping everything manually so
everything looks perfect but now
suddenly the source systems are
generating let's say new ids new values
that we didn't map yet so a typical
problem happens that initially we do
things correct but afterward we forget
about it or maybe we just go and switch
to another project and your reports can
show only nulls over the time because we
don't have values for that. So adding
data manually from us the humans to the
data model it is something critical and
we have to be careful for it. So if you
go to another project and you hand this
data model to someone else make sure to
inform them that they have to check from
the source systems. If there is
something new they have to go and extend
this manual data that we added to the
data model or what is way better and
perfect if you say you know what this
mapping should happen in the source
system and you are responsible for it
and provide it with all other files.
This is of course the best option
because then we don't have any more the
responsibility to touch the data inside
the data model. Everything going to be
like fully automated. Okay. So now back
to our junk dimension. The last step is
just to polish. So that means we will
just rename things the channel and here
we have a status. So only the S and the
priority.
Okay. So our junk dimension is ready to
go. Now let's go back to our orders.
Let's see. Okay. Again we say those
information is going to stay and that
means we just extracted one dimension
out of the order which is totally okay.
Now let's start with our fact. This is
going to be really interesting. Let's go
to the order line. This has the lowest
details. It makes sense. So let's go
first and make a reference out of it.
This is going to be our first fact
inside the data model. Let me just uh
minimize all those stuff and then let's
go and give it a name. I'm going to call
it the fact sales. All right. So this is
the foundations for our fact. We have
enough numbers inside it. But now the
thing is we need the dimensions. So we
have already here the product name but
we need the customers. We need the junk
dimension. We need the order date. So we
need all those stuff from the header to
be included as well in our new facts. So
that means now we're going to start like
combining things to our new fact and
here you have to be very very careful.
If you do one wrong merge you're going
to destroy the whole facts. So now we
come to the rule that we have to protect
our numbers. So that means any changes
that we do to the fact table we still
have to see the same numbers and if we
see something else we have of course to
fix before merging it to our facts. So
now let's try this out and I'm going to
show you how I usually do it. Now, of
course, I will not go and start like
scrolling down because usually the event
tables are really big. So, instead, I'm
going to go and close and apply. So,
just save it. All right. So, I think
somewhere is our new fact. But we don't
deal now with the data model. Let's go
to the report view. And now, we're going
to go and pick like one important
measure from our fact in order to keep
tracking it for each change. So, if I go
to the fact sales over here, we have
here some options like for example the
line total, the quantity, the cost, the
price. I'm going to go with the main
measure. This going to be the line
total. So let's drag and drop it to our
card. So my friends, this is the number
and we have to protect this. Anything
that we combine, we add to this fact
table. It always should result exactly
to this same number. If something
changed, then we have an issue. So we
have to know this number by heart until
the end of the project. This number
should be correct. Okay. So now we have
the number. Now let's go back to Power
Query and start adding things. So back
to the fact sales. Now what we're going
to do in order to bring the other
dimensions to our facts, we're going to
go and add the header. So we do that by
doing a merge query. We're going to go
to the orders that we have prepared. It
is over here. And how we going to
combine it? By the order ID and of
course very important the left outer
join. Okay. Now of course we have to
expand and here we have a lot of things.
I will not now judge everything. I'm
just going to go and remove the order ID
that we just used because we have it
already. And let's go and add all the
things we can always remove later. So
now we have everything from the header
the order and of course now the big
question is do we have any changes for
the numbers. So let's go and close and
apply and wait second until it's loaded.
So keep focusing on the number any
changes. Well nothing changed. This is
perfect. We still have the total sales.
Of course there are like different
methods on how to test like for example
you can go and build the relationship
between them and see whether it is one
to many. So you can do like different
ways of testing before merging. This is
one of them. So that was successful. Now
let's go back to the power query. Let's
go back to the fact sales. Okay. So with
this we have done the big merge between
the details and the sales safely and now
we can go to the next steps like for
example we have to go and build the keys
inside the fact. You know each fact has
a lot of keys in order to connect things
to the dimensions. And our fact is not
ready yet. So now instead of having the
product names we're going to go and have
the product key. Same thing for the
customer. So let's do that. Let's bring
the ids and the keys and we can start
with the customer. Now what we going to
do? We call it something like lookup. So
that means I'm going to go and merge
this to the dimension only to get the
ids. And again since we are merging we
have to be very careful. So we're going
to go and merge a query again. But this
time we are merging with the dimensions.
So we're going to go over here and find
the dimension customer. So now this is
our target to get the customer ID. But
of course we cannot now connect using
ids. We have to do something scary.
We're going to go and use the text the
customer name. And this can open the
door for many mistakes. So we have
really to check after that. So customer
name, customer name, left join. This is
my friends a lookup. So let's go and hit
okay. Now what we going to do? How we
going to expand? Of course we will not
go and bring now all the columns from
the dimension. We just want one thing
the customer ID. So this one we need and
hit okay. So now what I like to do next
is to just bring the ID on the starts so
that we have a real fact table. So it's
going to be somewhere here. Now of
course before we do anything else we
have to go and test. So I'm going to go
and close and apply and keep my eye on
this number.
Well, nothing changed. That was a
successful merge between those two
tables and there is no risk about it.
Now let's go and do the same thing for
the products. So let's go back to the
fact sales. Same thing. We have here the
product name. We need the product ID or
key. So merge. And now same thing. We're
going to go to the dimension product
over here. We join my friends using the
product name. Oh, it's not the product
code, which is really scary. So, let's
go and hit okay. And we just need a
lookup. So, that means we need the
product key. Perfect. Now, let's go as
well bring it to the starts side by side
with the other keys somewhere here. Now,
before we touch anything, we have to go
and test. Let's close and apply. Keep
our eye on the numbers. Did the numbers
just changed? Now, we have way more
total sales than before. Oh no, that was
not successful merge with the products.
we have something wrong and we have to
protect the original number. So yeah, we
have to do something. So let's go back
to power query and see what is going on.
So let's go back to the fact sales.
Well, what we can do, we can go and
check up actually which order have an
issue. So if you select those two and
say okay, let's go and group. I imagine
those two should be unique. So let's go
and count the rows for that. So now we
see a lot of ones, but we see two,
right? So here we have an issue. You can
see those orders are fanning out. So we
are getting like duplicates and let's go
and check something like for example the
order number 25 and then go and remove
this test. So now what we're going to do
we're going to go and search for this
order. It was the 25. All right look at
this. We have the same order. The
product name is identical but they have
different keys which is really bad. Of
course the rest going to be like
identical. It is getting like fanning
out. So this product has an issue. The
same product name but different keys.
And this is a typical issue if we are
joining using like names and text things
can go quickly wrong. So that means we
have to go and check the dimension
products. So it was the kitchen
something right. So let's just search
for it. This is the first one. And look
at this. We have duplicates actually
inside the Dian products. So we have
different codes for the same product.
And if you scroll to the right side you
can see one of them is actually have
more data than the other. So here we
have like brand and the other row
doesn't have brand. Same thing for the
price and the supplier. Of course, this
is a data quality issue that came from
the source system. And here we have like
two options. Either we're going to go to
the source system and tell them, hey
guys, you have like wrong stuff. You
have the same product twice. Go and
clean up the data and then everything
going to be fine here. Or you're going
to go and manually start removing
things. But of course, this is no
guarantee that later we will not get any
like quality issues. Now if the source
system don't want to clean the data and
they going to leave it as it is then
either you're going to go and now like
clean things manually or what is way
better we usually build like a data
warehouse where we build pipelines and
quality gates in order to detect and fix
those issues. But now for this project
since we don't have like a lot of
products we're going to go and manually
remove those bad rows. So here we have
to decide which version should stay and
of course it's going to be the one with
more infos. So that means with the nulls
should be dropped out of our dimension.
Now of course we have to detect how many
other like scenarios like this. So I
will just remove this filter. Select
all. Now how we going to do it? We're
going to go and just group by the
product names. So we're going to go and
say based on the product name go and
count the rows and change the filter to
two. You can see we have the issue with
two products the kitchen and the audio.
So it is not that a big deal. What we're
going to do we're going to go remove
this test. Of course, now the question
is how we're going to remove those two
rows. I will not do it like as the last
step inside our dimension. I'm going to
go way back maybe at this step filtering
the rows as we removed the one bad row
where the product key is equal to Z zed.
Now, of course, the question is where
are those stuff? Well, it is the last
two rows. You can see here we don't have
brands for them. We don't have a unit
price. And now I remember we had like a
really nice column for the source ID.
So, you can see here we have like a
source ID, a row identifier for each one
of them. and we can use it in order to
filter the data out. So this is one bad
ID. I'm going to go and copy the value
and then use it in order to filter the
data. So I will check this out. Same
thing for the last row. So I'm going to
go and copy this as well and as well use
it in order to filter the data out. All
right. So as you can see now in our
filter we have three things. We are
filtering the data based on the product
code and based on the source ID. So now
let's go and check again. We have to
group up the data by the product name.
So group by insert and product name. Now
let's check the filter. Yes, we have
only one. So that means my friends, our
product names are actually unique. But
be careful now to just remove the test.
All right. Now we go to the last step to
make sure that everything is working
correctly. Nice. So now let's go and
save and check again our numbers. So
come on. Come on. Yes, we got back our
number. With that we protected the
number and the fact and it was
successful merge to the product. So we
can now go and continue. Let's go back
to the power query. So where is our fact
table. So with this now we got the two
big dimensions the product key the
customer ID. Now what is left is
actually the junk right? So we have
those three columns and we have to
connect the junk to it. Now I see
already that we have an issue for the
lookup. We need all those three in order
to join it with the dimension. But we
just removed the order channel, right?
So if I go now and merge, it will not
work. That means I'm going to take it
back and going to go to the junk and I'm
going to go and bring the ID back. So I
believe this was the step. So let's go
and bring it back. Yes. So we need those
stuff. I'm going to go and rename it.
This is the channel code. Now let's go
back to the fact sales and let's do the
merge with the junk dimension. So we
need it. It is over here the order
flags. Now we're going to go and mark
all those stuff but not the channel
itself because it has no idea about it.
It is something that we added. Then
we're going to go to the right side and
select those three. So now things should
work and in the correct order by the
way. So the order channel, the status
and the priority. Same thing from the
dimension. Left join. Okay. Now the next
step we're going to go and expand. Since
it is only a lookup, we just need the
key. So okay. Yes, we got the junk flag.
Uh let's go and do it side by side with
the others. And of course the big
question, do we have issues with our
number? So I'm going to go and close and
apply. Well, look at this. It is safe.
So our number is protected. Let's go
back. I know we are jumping between but
this is part of the job. We have to do
things like carefully. All right. So
with this now we got all the keys, all
the ids inside our fact and it is ready
to get connected to the dimensions. And
now we're going to go to the next phase
where I like to go and drop things and
polish the facts in order to follow the
standards and the rules that we have
added at the beginning. So now we're
going to start with the first thing. Do
we really need all those columns inside
our facts? So let's do it step by step.
The line ID, we need the order ID as
well in order to count how many orders
inside the fact. The product name, we
don't need it anymore. We just used it
in order to build the keys. So we're
going to go and remove it. Then we have
the keys. That's of course what you
need. And then we have the numbers. We
need all the stuff in the facts. Now we
come to something that is really
important to understand. Now the thing
is in transactional source systems they
usually store the same informations over
and over in different tables just in
order to optimize the performance of
their UI and applications. And this is
of course a big issue for us because
then we're going to have like the same
information everywhere inside our data
model. And this is going to make a big
confusion on how to build the reports.
So that means my friends you have to
protect the data model by having like
one single point of truth for each info.
So that means if I have the customer
city inside the dimension customer I
don't need it somewhere else. This going
to be the dimension customer is the
single point of truth for the cities of
the customers. So I don't have to leave
it in like another dimension or to leave
it in the facts. So always try to reduce
the noise that we inherited from the
source systems and make a decision where
you going to store what but only once. I
said I was only going to say it once.
>> So that means my friends, we will not
leave the customer city inside our
facts. We have it already inside our
dimension. Look at this. We have here
the city of our customers. So that means
we don't need this extra noise that we
have in the facts. We will just go and
remove it. By the way, this is one of
the things that I have noticed a lot.
People going to say, you know what, we
might need it. So you really have to
take a hard decision and start removing
things that you don't need and keep it
only in one place. Same thing as well
for the region name. It as well belongs
to the customer dimension. So let's go
remove. And now here's something
interesting to what we said. We have
here the ship to city and pill to city.
This is different information than we
had in the dimension customer. This
belongs to the transaction to the order.
So for each order we have the city where
it is shipped to. And here the customers
might change from one order to another
to which city or to which location the
order should be delivered. So the city
here belongs to the transaction to the
event. It is not like master data of the
customer. So that means this has
different meaning than the cities that
we have inside the dimension. It is
something here transactional and could
change from one order to another. So
that's why I will not go and remove
those informations because this belongs
to the event to the transaction. So it's
always really important to understand
the business to understand the domain
how things works. So let's keep going.
The order date of course we need it. Now
we have a lot of things that we don't
need anymore because they were only here
in order to do a lookup. So I'm going to
go and remove those stuff that were
belonging to the junk. And now we come
to something really interesting. The
total sales in the header. So as well we
have to decide because now we have two
things. Look at this. We have the total
sales for the whole order. And here we
have like the sales for each item each
line in the order. Now of course if
everything is clean the sum of the line
of totals should be exactly the same
value that we have here from the header.
So that means the grain between those
two are different. And now here usually
I decide on the following where I say we
go and remove any pre-agregated values
because to be honest I don't trust it.
If I need the total sales for each order
actually I just go and summarize those
values. So I have the data already
available. I don't want to have like
pre-agregated things inside the data
model that's maybe outdated or maybe the
calculation is not anymore correct.
That's why I tend to remove any
pre-agregated things that I inherit from
the source system. Especially if I have
the same information from another
detailed measure. So that's why the
order total that we got from the header,
it is something unnecessary and I'm
going to go and remove it. I can always
get it back if it's needed. All right,
my friends. So with this we have removed
a lot of things from our fact table and
now things looks really good. Now I
would like always to order my fact like
this. We have always at the start all
the ids and then all the dates and at
the end all the measures all the
numbers. It is not something that's very
important but I like to order it like
this. So that's why I'm going to go and
grab all the context to the starts and
just leave the numbers at the end. So
now look at this. We have ids
everywhere. Then we have the cities. We
have to do something about it. After
that we have the dates. We have only one
and at the end we have the bundle of all
measures and numbers that we have in the
fact. So we are almost there but to be
honest I'm still not happy about those
two. So we have the ship to city and the
pill to city. Now of course I can leave
those informations like this. But we
could build a dimension for it. So
that's we have like IDs instead of text
here which can reduce of course the size
of the fact table. And at the same time
maybe I need more context to those
cities like for example the region or
the country and so on. So it's always
better to convert those contextes to
dimensions. So that means we have
actually to construct a new dimension
called dimension geo or locations or
whatever you want to call it. Of course
the question is what is the source for
this new dimension? Should we get it
from the fact or do we have like some
row tables that can help us with that?
Well remember we had really nice row
table called cities. This is perfect.
This is already like waiting for us to
build a dimension for it. We just
skipped it. As you can see, we cannot
like think of everything at the start.
As we progress in the data model, we're
going to understand, okay, we need more
things and we always can go back to the
row data and make new dimensions. So
now, how we're going to do it? This is
going to be very simple. We're going to
go and create a reference and we're
going to drag this reference to the
dimensions. We're going to go and give
it a name dem go. Now, we have to make
sure that this has no duplicates. I'm
not really sure whether it has or not.
So, I'm going to go and remove
duplicates. Well, nothing changed, but
I'm going to leave it as step. Maybe
things changed, of course. What is
missing in this dimension? We need an
ID, right? So, we're going to go and add
a new index that starts from one and
bring it to the top. So, let's go and
rename it. This going to be geo key sur.
And the last thing that I'm going to do
just rename things. So, this is the city
and this is the region.
Perfect. Now, we have new dimension of
course. What is the next step? We're
going to go and connect it to our fact
sales. So over here using the city name
but my friends we're going to go and
connect it twice because here we have
like two cities right they are different
the city for the shipment and another
one for the build. So let's go and do
that. We're going to do it quickly.
We're going to go and merge and then
grab our new dimension. It's going to be
of course the city. So and then hit
okay. Expand. We need only the key. All
right. And then we're going to merge
again for the other column. So same
dimension we need the city but this time
for the pill. All right. expand as well.
We need the key. Now, before we forget,
we're going to go and rename things. So,
we're going to call it ship to city key.
And the other one, bill to city key. All
right. So, now let's go and grab them to
the other keys. So, we can put it over
here. And now we're going to go and
remove those two cities. We have ids.
So, remove. Perfect. Now, let's have a
final look. Look at this. We just have
numbers. Now the last step that I'm
going to do is that I'm going to go and
just rename all the columns to follow
our standards, the snake case. All
right. So now I just went through all
the columns and everything is renamed.
Look at this. Everything looks perfect.
We have only numbers and dates. And this
is exactly how the fact table supposed
to be. If you get it my friend, like
this, then congrats. We just built a
perfect core fact table for our data
model out of this complicated setup. The
header and the details. Now I'm going to
say the fact is ready. And now we're
going to go to the satisfying part where
we're going to go and deactivate some
row tables. And then we're going to go
ahead and connect the dimensions to our
facts. Let's go and do that. I'm just go
and deactivate now the orders, both of
them. And as well the order line. And
then close and apply. All right. So now
what we going to do? Let's go and make
like two words. On the left side, it's
going to be this chaos. But on the right
side, we're going to have our new clean
data model, the star schema. So this is
our fact. And now let's go and bring our
dimensions. So product the geo customers
and the junk dimension. So let's form
the star and make sure we don't have any
garbage like in our model. So now let's
go and zoom in. We still have to do it
carefully how we connect the dimensions
to the facts. But the pattern it's
always the same. So we're going to grab
the customer ID and put it on the fact
here. It's very important that you see
one to many relationship and the filter
is single. So never both. Okay. So
that's it. Let's save. This looks good.
One to many. And the arrow going to the
fact. Same thing for the product key.
So, drag and drop. One to many single.
Save. And for the junk. So, we need flag
key is over here. One to many single.
And now comes something of course really
interesting. We have only one dimension.
But we have to connect it twice to our
fact table. One for the billing and
another one for the shipment. Well,
we're going to do that. So, the geo key
goes to the shipment. One to many money
single. This going to be the active one
and the second one going to be the
billing. So drag and drop one to many
and single. So save. So with us my
friends, our dimension go is actually a
roleplaying dimension. We have two
relationships to the fact table. One is
active that's going to be used all the
time and another one is inactive. Thus
we have to use ducks in order to use
this relationship of course. But now you
might say okay this is like way too more
complicated than before. If we had like
both of them inside the fact table, I
can just go and use them inside my
reports. Well, this is a fair point. If
you never need like more geo
informations, but if you start like
needing the regions, the countries, and
this geo is like getting bigger and
bigger, then it makes no sense to leave
it inside the fact. And as well, it
makes no sense to go and duplicate the
dimension twice. Those are all bad
designs. So now, my friends, look at
this. If I zoom out, you can see clearly
the two words. On the left side we have
the full chaos and on the right side we
start having the shape of our star
schema our goal and things looks way
more better than before. So this exactly
my friends how we migrate from bad data
model to a new better model that's going
to deliver only correct numbers good
performance and as well reduce any
confusion.
Okay. So now we have to keep going but
this time I'm going to go and pick
something that is little bit easy. So
that we have break. I will not pick
something complicated. We're going to go
this time with the inventories. This is
an easy one. So, let's go and do
something about it. We're going to go
and enter the power query. So, what do
we have here? The inventories. Oh, yes.
We have here the product names. And for
each month, we have the total amount of
items that is planned. Well, of course,
the first question is, is it a fact or
dimension? Well, since we have numbers,
we have dates. This is going to be a
fact. So, before we do anything, we're
going to go and make a reference, then
move it to our facts. This is our second
fact. I'm going to go and call it fact
inventory. And now we can start
preparing the fact. Now the first easy
issue with that the first column is not
promoted as a header. So the column
names are weird. That's why we're going
to go and say use first row as header.
Easy win. Now by looking to this you can
see it is really nice table for us for
humans to read. But this is very bad for
data moduling because the date
information is stored as a column name.
We cannot use this of course in
reporting. That's why we have to convert
this from human ready to data module and
reporting. And how we can do that using
unpivot by turning the columns into
rows. It is very simple what we can do.
We can go to transform then select all
the columns. And here we have this nice
function unpivot. Look at this. Like
magic. Now all the column names are
values inside my table. And this looks
already like a fact table. And now after
that I think this is the data type text,
right? So we can see here text. We have
to go and convert this to a real date.
then it can be easier to use in the
reporting and same thing that we have
done before we have to go and get the
product key. So we need a lookup and how
we going to do it as usual we go and
merge with the dimension. So dimension
products connect the names and say okay.
Now after that we're going to go and get
only the key bring it to the start and
remove the product name. We don't need
it anymore. So remove and of course my
friends you have to go and check things
and now I'm doing things quickly but
still we have to go to the report make a
card go and calculate all the values
after merging are we getting like any
duplicates but now in order to make
things quicker I will not do that but
you have to do it at your side. I would
never trust that everything is okay now.
So now the last step in our new fact I'm
going to go and rename things. So this
is the product key and this going to be
I'm going to call it for now month and
instead of value I'm going to call it
units. All right friends. So actually
that's it. With this we got our second
fact and it is perfect. It has an ID, it
has a date and as well a measure. Now
before we go and start connecting
things, I'm just going to go and like
deactivate. So the inventory could not
be loaded and actually we have here few
things that we didn't deactivate before.
So we have here the orders and as well
the channels. So you we don't need you.
Okay. So now let's close and apply. You
can see the chaos is getting reduced by
the time. And here we got our new fact
table. Let me just zoom in and have a
look. Probably I done it correctly. I
wanted to do that but as you can see we
never connect the fact tables together.
So there's no direct lines using the
product key. We connect the fact tables
always using the shared dimension. And
this can be the dimension products. Of
course a quick look. It is one to many
relationship and the direction is
correct. As you can see, if you do
things correctly, PowerBI going to love
it and it's going to build it for you
correctly. So my friends, look at this.
We are moving from star schema and now
we are like building the galaxy, right?
Which is of course still star schema. So
my friends, that was a quick win. All
right friends, so that was the
inventory. It was a little break. Now
let's go back to something more
advanced. Now we have to go and pick
something from our data model. So we
have invoices and stuff. I'm going to
say let's go and solve the campaign. So
we have the campaign log and another one
the campaign is cues. So it's time to
solve this puzzle. As usual, we're going
to go inside Power Query. So let's go
and do that. Okay. So let's go to the
campaign log. So again, what do you have
here? The campaign name, the channel,
the start date, and the end date of the
campaign, the budget date, and some nice
numbers. So clearly this looks like a
nice fact table, but still inside it, we
have some context about these facts. So
the context is my friend the campaign
itself. So it looks like a clear split
between one dimension and one fact,
right? And let's have a quick look to
the other one. The campaign is cues. We
have here the campaign name and the
product names as a list. So this sounds
like the connection to the rest of our
star schema, the products, the product
codes. So I think I got the full big
picture. Now let's go and start building
the dimension, the new one. All right.
So as usual, we're going to go and
create a reference out of the row table.
Now we're going to start with the
dimension. So that's why we're going to
bring it to the dimension folder and
rename it. So this is going to be the
dimension campaign. All right. So now
which columns going to stay and which
going to leave? Well my friends we have
here clear split. So all those columns
are actually transactional columns that
belongs to the fact and the rest going
to be the dimension. So let's get rid of
those. Now of course as usual we're
going to go and remove all the
duplicates from those columns. So remove
with this we got our six campaign that
we have inside our data model. And now
by looking to this you might say but
wait a second what is going on here
actually the facts always contains like
dates and numbers and this dimension
looks like a fact. So why we are calling
this a dimension campaign? Well totally
fair point at the start I was as well
confused about this topic but my friend
the dimensions and facts are not defined
by the data type of the columns. Think
about it a dimension is just a context a
description for an event and a fact
table it is the event itself. It is
transaction. It is something that keep
happening every day. So something that
grows fast, right? So now by looking to
this my friends, this is not
transactional. This is not an event.
Yes, it has a start date and end date.
But this is actually describing the
campaign. It is more context, more info
for the campaign itself. And the number
budget over here, it is a fixed value
that as well describe how big is our
budget for this campaign. So yes, it
looks like an event, but this is not
transactional. Those are just describing
the campaign. Now, in order to
understand what is a real transaction,
just go back to the original table. Look
at this what each row here is
representing. So, for the first row, for
example, we have the campaign name, the
channel, the start and ends, the budget.
But here we have a real transaction with
the dates. So, we can see every day what
is happening. So, in the first day, what
happens? We spent so much, we got so
much clicks and impressions. What
happens in the next day for the same
campaign? We spent less but we got more
clicks and so on. So my friends all
those columns are actually transactional
columns. Every day we are like getting
something new about the campaign. And if
you go to the left side you're going to
see those informations are really
static. So the budget will not change
the start and end will not change as
well. And because my friends those
informations are describing the event
itself. So the left side is not changing
so much that's why it is a dimension but
on the right side there is a lot of
transactions and movement and that's why
my friends those four columns are
effects I hope this makes sense but this
is how we define a dimension and effect
not only based on the data types but as
well what is going on how the
transaction is happening and by
understanding the business itself so
that's why I decided on the split based
actually on the data now let's go back
to our dimension we are not done yet of
course what is missing we need an ID. So
start from one, move it to the left
side. And actually that's it. The last
thing that we have to do is to just go
and rename things. So I will just do it
quickly.
This is the key. This is the name.
This is the channel
start date.
All right. So I can say our dimension is
ready. Now let's go and create our fact
table. So same thing we're going to go
and create a reference. As you can see
now our work is repetitive, right? This
is exactly how things works. So this
going to be the fact campaign but I'm
going to call it spend since we have the
spending there. All right. So now what
we're going to do actually we don't need
all those affirmations. We have them
already in the dimension. That means we
need now to do a lookup in order to get
the campaign key. So as usual we go and
merge queries with our new dimension the
campaign. We join with the campaign
name. It is unique in our dimension and
then say okay. Now since this is a
lookup, we just need the key. We don't
need all other informations. Drag it to
the start because we have always the
keys at the start and get rid of all
those things. Those are in our
dimension. So now what is left? We have
the date impression. Click spent. Looks
nice. The last step we're going to go
and just rename things. So I'm going to
do it quickly. Campaign key. And I'm
going to make everything lowered.
All right, my friends. So with this now
we got our third fact inside our data
model. Now let's go to the last table.
We have here still the campaign SKUs.
Now before we start working on this
we're going to go and create a reference
out of it. So reference. Now I'm going
to go and put it in the facts but I'm
going to explain myself later. Okay just
stay with me. Now the first issue with
that we have here we don't have a column
names. So that's why I'm going to go and
promote it as a header. Now what do we
have here? We have like a list of
product codes. Uh this is of course a
nice thing but I cannot use it in
reporting right I cannot go and connect
it now to our model. So that's why we
have to do something about it and we
call moving a list into rows and
explode. So we have to explode it into
multiple rows and we can do that easily
by going to the column and say split
columns by delimiter because we have
here a comma. Let me just move it a
little bit. So the delimiter is actually
a comma. Now the thing is I will not go
and split by columns. I don't want each
value to go in separate columns. This
makes no sense. This time we are
splitting by a row. So if you go to the
advanced settings, you can see here we
split by columns or rows. I'm going to
go with the rows. All right. So actually
that's it. Let's go and hit okay. Look
at this. Now each product code is now a
new row. But now before we celebrate
this, we have equality issue. If you see
like some values are shifted little bit
to the right side. You can understand
this. If you go back to the original
steps at the start, you can see the
values are yes splitted by comma but
there's like after that space. This is
just like a cosmetic thing for us in
order to read the list easier. But of
course, this is causing an issue after
we explode. So you see the first value
has no space, but all other values are
like moving to the right side because of
the white space at the start. So how to
solve this? It is very simple. We're
going to right click on it and then go
to transform. And here we have the nice
trim. Look at this. Everything moved to
the left side. And we don't have any
more empty space because my friends, we
have always to take care of the values
that are used for the merge later. All
right. So now what we going to do with
this, my friends? Well, this is not like
a dimension because it is like two
different entities, right? The campaign
and the products. And as well, you can
see it in our dimensions. We have a
dimension for the product. We have
dimension for the campaign. And this is
like just mapping between them. So, I
cannot go and put it in the dimension
product or in the dimension campaign.
And of course, it makes no sense to
create like a third dimension called
campaign product mapping because this is
not one entity. So, now in order to
understand more what is this, let's go
and convert those values to keys. as we
have done like in the facts. So now
instead of the campaign name, I'm going
to go and make a lookup and grab it from
the dimension. So campaign and we
connect by the campaign name. All right.
Now let's go and grab the key. We're
going to do the same thing as well for
the products. So let's go and merge
dimension product. This time we are
connecting using the product code, not
the product name. All right. Now let's
go and get the key, put them side by
side and get rid of those two
informations. So remove columns. Now the
last thing I'm just going to go and
replace the names. So this is the
campaign name and the other one is the
product key. Now look at this my
friends. If you have table that contains
a lot of keys and you have the feeling
this is like mapping or a bridge between
multiple dimensions. This table has no
numbers just like collection of keys.
Then my friend welcome to a new type of
facts. We call it the factless fact. A
factless fact it is like a classical
fact table. It has a lot of ids in order
to connect multiple dimensions. It has
as well dates. But the only difference
is that it doesn't contain any numbers.
So no measures. So that means with the
factless facts we are not measuring
anything. So we are not interested about
the how much. We are only tracking
whether something happened or not. So it
is very simple. If your fact has no
measures no numbers then this is a
factless fact. Though in this example it
is little bit weird. Okay. It is not
that like perfect fact that we usually
have. We don't have a date only the
keys. And as well, we cannot turn this
into dimension because this is not
describing actually anything. If this
keeps like really weird inside your data
model, you can go and just get rid of
it. But for now, we just build it.
That's why I'm going to go and call it
the fact promotion coverage. Okay. So,
this is our weird fact. But of course,
we have way better fact here that we can
do a lot of analyszis using it. And we
have our new dimension. So now next what
we're going to do with that we're going
to go and deactivate things. We don't
need them anymore. So disable load. Yes.
Same thing for the campaign SKUs.
All right. So now let's go and close and
apply. All right. So now we have here
less things on the chaos word. We are
moving to the right side. And here we
have our new stuff. So this is our
factless facts. Let me zoom in. This is
our new facts. The campaign spend. It is
connected correctly to the dimension
campaign. So one to many relationship
and the arrow is correct and the
dimension campaign it is a shared
dimension to the factless facts which is
just playing the role as a bridge
between the product and the campaign.
Look at this things are getting
connected. Yeah slowly. So I will just
move things a little bit closer. So now
by looking at this you can see our
shared dimension the product is shared
now by three facts. So it is really very
important one of course and this is of
course a typical thing because in each
business the products are the most
important things. So we are
transitioning right? All right. Now my
friends, we come as well to a point
where it's going to get a little bit
heavy. But I'm going to explain it step
by step. So that means if you are
watching and you didn't take break, go
take fresh air, make a cafe, and then we
continue. This is going to be a little
bit tricky, but we're going to see.
[snorts]
Okay, let's go. So now, as I said, we
have now some events that we're going to
tackle in one go. Of course, as usual,
we're going to go back to the Power
Query in order to understand the content
and reshape things later. So now what
else that we have inside our table? We
have the invoices. So you can see we
have an invoice ID, an order ID, the
customer name, invoice date, amount. So
this is as well transactional. This is
an event. Now if you go to the payments,
you're going to have the same feeling.
We have the payment ID, the invoice ID,
customer payment day, and the amount.
Now if you go to the shipments, again,
very close shipment ID or the ID and so
on. So my friends, all of those things
are events and somehow they are all
connected together. Now in order to
understand how to deal with this, we
have first to understand the process. So
the process is very simple like any
order. We have a customer which is the
company. They go and place an order. So
this is the first step. After that we're
going to go and ship the products to the
customer. So this is the second step.
And of course it going to follow up with
a delivery. So this going to be the
third step. So we're going to deliver.
And after that we're going to issue an
invoice. So this is number four. And the
last step my friends the payment is
going to happen. So pay this is step
number five. So actually this is the
whole process of ordering something from
our business. Now of course each step in
our process is actually a transaction.
So it has like a date. It has a number.
So how much the total sales for this
order. Same thing for the shipment. The
delivery had as well date invoice and as
well we have like some numbers on top of
it and how much the customer did pay. So
each one of them has their own table and
transactions but everything is actually
my friends are connected back to the
order. This is the main trigger for the
whole event. Now of course what are our
options in order to build this process
inside our data model. Either we're
going to go like the source system where
we're going to go and build a table for
each step. So that means we're going to
go and build like one fact table for
each step. With that we're going to get
like five fact tables. We have already
one for the orders but for the rest we
have to go and build them. Well, this
sounds smart and reasonable things to
do. But now, if you have like a deeper
look to each of those steps, you're
going to find that we are talking about
the same money over and over. So, the
same number should be in the orders and
as well in the invoice and I hope in the
payments. Now, of course, the big
question is, do the business users
really want all those numbers in our
reports? Are there many use cases for
all those numbers? Well, I'm going to
say no. Usually the business users going
to ask us, okay, find me the total
number of sales for the whole business
or maybe by the region or by the
products. And for this my friends, we
have one single point of truth for that.
It going to be the orders. So I'm going
to go and grab the number the money from
the order. So I would not go and start
like showing all the numbers from each
steps because at the end it is the same
money. So that means we will not get
like a lot of use cases for those
numbers that we're going to have inside
those facts. But actually by looking to
this we're going to get better questions
from the business. They're going to ask
questions about the whole process
itself. So they're going to start asking
questions actually not about the numbers
but about the dates. So those
informations are way more interesting
than the numbers like for example how
long it takes from an order to delivery
or how long it takes from an order to
the payment. So there will be a lot of
questions how long from the delivery to
invoice or invoice payment. So that
means usually the business and
especially the process expert they going
to ask a lot of questions about the
dates. So that means what is actually
interesting from all those tables are
actually the dates for the business
intelligence. And now what we could do
instead of having like a fact for each
step we're going to go and make like one
fact table that's going to put side by
side all those dates inside this fact
table. And once we have everything in
one fact table then we can answer many
questions about the process. And of
course I'm not inventing here something
in business intelligence in data
modeling. This has a famous name. This
is my friend a type of fact table called
accumulating snapshot. So each row going
to represent like one event one order
that going to hold all the milestone
dates of the steps in our process. So
this is the accumulating snapshot fact
that we're going to go now and build.
Okay. So now since we have now special
type of fact, it's going to be as well
special how to build it. It will not be
like the others. Now since we're going
to have like the whole process in one
row, a lot of tables going to be
involved in building this fact. So this
going to be something special. Now how
to build it? We usually start with the
spine and usually it is the first step
in the process. It is the order. So that
means my friends this orders that we
build at the start where we combine
things together. This going to be the
starting point for our new facts. That
means I'm going to go and create a
reference out of it. Then we're going to
go and drop it in the facts. So we can
go and call it for example fact order
process or fulfillment whatever. All
right. So with this we have now good
starting point. This is the spine of our
fact. Each row is one order. And now the
question is which columns going to stay
and which going to leave. Now again what
is our purpose? We want to show for each
order for each customer all the steps
dates for the whole process. So that
means I don't actually need a lot of
things over here. I just need the order
dates. So that means I'm going to go and
remove all those stuff. Same thing for
the junks over here. So let's just and
go and remove. Actually that's all what
I need. So order ID, customer name, and
order date. This is the first step in
the process. Now of course instead of
having the customer name in order to
connect it to our data model, we're
going to go and make a lookup. So we're
going to go and join it with the
dimension customer. Customer name
customer name. And then we're going to
go and get our key.
Perfect. go to the left side and remove
the customer name. Perfect. Now we have
the first step. Now we have to go and
get the other steps of our process. What
is the next one? We have the shipment.
So we have the shipment ID, the order
ID, the mode, the date and the delivery
date. So actually we have here two dates
of the process which is exactly what do
we need. Now about the mode, we can
include it or not. But for now I will
not include those stuff inside our fact.
So I'm going to go back to that order
process and then merge the shipment with
our table. So it is somewhere over here
shipments. We join by the order ID and
hit okay. Now we have to go and expand.
We don't need the ids. We have it
already. We don't need the mode. I just
need the dates. Perfect. Look at this.
We have the shipment date and the
delivery. Now what is the next step? We
need actually the invoice. So let's have
a look to the invoices. So the invoice
ID again the order ID. This is our key.
We have again the customer name. We
don't need it. We have it already. We
just need the invoice dates. The amount
is going to be like the total sales. So
I'm just collecting the dates. Let's go
back to our process. And same thing, we
can go and merge invoices. Order ID.
Order ID. Okay. Then we have to expand.
So just give me the date. So now we are
getting closer. Now the last step in our
process going to be the payment, right?
So over here, well, we don't have the
order ID, we have an invoice ID. So
we're going to join using the invoice
ID. We have it. We don't need the
customer name. Just give me the date. So
let's go back to the process. Now of
course I need the invoice ID. That's why
I'm going to go some steps back in order
to expand correctly. So I need the
invoice and as well the dates otherwise
I cannot join it. So actually now we
have the ID and now we can do the merge.
So we need the payments over here. This
time the invoice ID with the invoice ID.
Let's hit okay. Then the last expansion
we need the payment date. Now I can go
and get rid of the invoice ID. I don't
need it anymore. So remove. So now do we
have everything for our process? We have
the order, the shipment, delivery,
invoice, and payment. And this looks
exactly like our business process. So
this is my friends, the fact that called
accumulating snapshots for one event.
You're going to get all the dates of the
process. Of course, I'm doing things
very quickly. I'd usually do and test a
lot. Each merge, I check whether we have
duplicates or the numbers are correct.
But now in order to make things a little
bit quicker, I'm just merging like
crazy. So this looks really good. Now
what we going to do actually with the
other tables? I'm going to say we're
going to go and deactivate them because
we have now the most important aspect of
all those tables. And of course if in
the future we got like more specific
things and more specific questions about
for example the invoices then we might
go activate it again and build like
special purpose fact for it. But
actually we got the best of this table.
So we connected is with the order we
have already the customers the invoice
dates and the amount is not that
important we have it in the fact sales.
So that's why my friends I'm going to go
and deactivate it from the model. Same
things for the others. So let's go to
the payments. The same money is just
repeating over and over. So deactivate.
Same thing for the shipment over here.
Well we can go and include the mode if
it's really that important. But again if
we get like some specific use case for
the shipment we can go and activate it
and add this column. will not be now
necessary for our data model. So we are
deactivating a lot of things. Now by
looking to this we still have the
invoice lines. This is exactly the same
setup like we had at the start. The
invoice line is the details of the
invoice and the invoices is the header.
Again if there is like special needs,
special use case in order to analyze the
invoices we can go and always build a
fact tables out of those stuff. But for
now I don't see it as a core thing
inside our data model because again the
same money is repeating. So I'm going to
go and deactivate this as well. All
right. Now we have deactivated almost
like everything. So let's go and save
and see what do we have and look to our
data model. So this should get really
empty.
Oh wow. Look, we still have like four
tables out of the chaos. And of course
everything went to the new data model.
Now of course you might think now I'm
trying to rush up the project in order
to close things. But to be honest, this
is exactly the way how I work. I don't
go and push everything inside the data
model in order to have everything just
in case someone ask for something. I try
to push really hard on the data model
only to leave what is necessary. And I
can tell you after working in many
projects, this exactly the process. I
understand the business and try to bring
the core facts and the core dimensions
to the data model. And if there is like
one or two customers are asking very
specific questions about like some weird
tables, I would not go and destroy the
data model to be honest. I'm going to go
and build another PowerBI model just for
their purposes. So it's going to be
something quick just to make their
analysis and that's it and try to
protect the core data model from those
age use cases. So this is my style on
how I do data modeling. But there are a
lot of people that go and include
everything inside the data model just in
case. Well, if you do it like this, then
you are including a lot of things that
will never be used in reporting and this
is really waste of space performance and
as well confused a lot in reporting. All
right, so now back to our data model.
Now we have like a new things. We have
to be as well careful that the new core
data model is not getting like full of
chaos. So we have the order process.
This is the accumulating snapshot type
and yes it is connected with the
customers and that's it. So yes, we are
getting a lot of facts but we are making
sure none of the facts are connecting to
each others. They always go through a
shared dimension. Our shared dimension
now is the customers and the products
and always the relationships are
healthy. So we have here one to many
relationship and the direction is from
the dimension to the facts. So this is
not chaotic. This is very healthy. Okay.
So now we are getting very close to end
the migration. Look at this sneaky table
at the end. Let's go and put it here. So
what do we have here? We have five
tables yet to go. Now let's go to power
query and start like investigating those
stuff. Now I'm going to start with the
very obvious one. Remember the sheet
one. It is a complete duplicate of the
shipment. So they are like identical
tables. Think this is an import problem
that happens maybe from the source
system or in the Excel. Of course
happens a lot in real projects where you
import stuff that are actually not
necessary inside the model. So what you
going to do? We're going to go and just
delete it. Not enable. So we remove it
completely physically from our model. it
is not something that we're going to
need later. Okay, so let's keep going.
We have the exchange rates. Well, I'm
thinking about this. We don't have like
any relevance for this inside our data
model. It is something transactional
maybe important for the interfaces in
the source system. But for reporting,
why do we need those informations? And
actually, I cannot go and connect it to
our data model. That's why I'm going to
say this is a standalone table that
actually will not help us at all. So,
I'm going to go actually and deactivate
it. I will not like physically remove
it. Maybe there is like use case for it.
We cannot connect this anywhere. So
deactivate. Now what else we have here?
The sales target. So here we have the
target revenue and the period. So
someone is like actually planning the
target for each month. Well, this is
like mini transactional table. This is
not a dimension. That's why I'm going to
say let's go and make small fact out of
this. It will not hurt. So we're going
to go and bring it to the facts. Rename
it of course. So rename fact. I'm going
to stay call it the sales targets. And
what else we could do? We just go and
maybe rename things to follow our
standards. So the date and the target
revenue. So actually that's it. It is a
mini one that don't have really any like
ids to customers or dimensions. Only has
a date and a measure. So that's it.
Let's go and deactivate this one.
Disable load. Now what else do we have?
We have the security. And as well we
have a dimension order. This is of
course completely garbage table. So here
we have just like a list of all orders.
And this makes no sense. We have already
better tables for this. So I'm going to
say I'm going to go and remove this
completely physically from our data
model. So delete we will not deactivate.
Perfect. Now the last thing that is left
is the security. Of course my friends we
cannot leave the data model as it is. We
have to make it secure following the
standards. And here we have a very
helpful table to let us know which user
is allowed to see which region. But of
course we're going to do this in the
last phase. So now what I'm going to say
actually we have covered everything. So
let's go and close and apply and have a
look. Yes, it is empty. I know we have
the security. We can do this later. I'm
going to bring it near to our data model
here. And my friends, I can say the
nightmare data set just got cleaned up.
So, we have here a healthy star schema.
Just enjoy this view. Have a look to
this. We have a healthy data model. I
think my camera gave up. So, back now.
Look at this my friends. We don't have
anything anymore from the old spider
web, the nightmare data set. Everything
is migrated to a clean star schema of
course a Galaxy one. So everything is
connected using the best practices and
we have here only one fact table that
stands alone and the security table. So
just sit back and look at this. This is
really satisfying. But of course we are
not done yet. We still have the last
phase.
All right [music] friends. Now the next
phase it's all about polishing the data
model. So we're going to finalize our
data model. We're going to make it
trustworthy before handing it over for
the next phases. So we're going to do
things like for example we're going to
go and check again our standards our
rules and check whether all the tables
and the columns are following it like
the snake case like the prefixes
suffixes the keys and so on. The second
step that I usually do is that I go and
create the dimension date. It is a
special dimension that actually going to
be needed almost in all our facts. So we
have to create it and connect it in the
data model. This is one of the things
that I do at the end. And after that
we're going to build like a collection
of measures. So we're going to make like
set of very obvious measures that's
going to be needed on top of this model.
And after that we're going to make sure
that our data model is secure. That
means we're going to apply on this model
the role level security is like almost
standards in any project. And after that
we do the final testing. So we go to the
report level and we go and check only
the big numbers and whether the
dimensions are working correctly to make
sure that everything is correct before
handing over this data model for the
others. Usually the last step is I go
and make a meeting and talk to the
others, draw them the star schema and
make a guide on how to use it for
reporting. All right, my friends. Now
let's deep dive in this phase.
>> Okay, let's do it.
>> Okay, so now let's start with the first
step where we're going to go and check
whether our data model is following the
standards and rules. I'm pretty sure
that I have forgotten something during
the building phase. We are at the end
human and we might forget things. So how
I usually do it is that I go to the
table view over here and have a quick
check on the right side. So I can see
that everything is sorted correctly
using the prefix. So we have the
dimensions and the facts and the last
one is the security. So by looking to
this I can say all the names of our
tables are following the standards. Then
we go just quickly through all the
tables one by one just to have a quick
look. Well everything looks so far fine.
Well seems that I have followed all the
rules. Well not everywhere.
So I have to fix here the naming
conventions for this fact table. So we
have to do it quickly to go to the power
query. Okay, the fact order. So
customer ID, order dates,
ship date.
Okay, looks good. So I'm going to go and
close and apply. All right, so we are
following the standards over here. Let's
go and keep going. Looks good as well.
Good. The security going to be at the
end. Okay, so that means we are
following all the rules for the table
names and as well for the columns. Now
there is another thing that I do that I
go and check the date format. Well, you
can see here that in our dates we are
using the full name, the full month.
This looks really weird in reporting. If
you have a lot of dates, it's going to
take a lot of space in the report level.
So what I usually do is that I decide on
one like smaller format and I stick to
it for the whole data model. So now what
I'm going to do, I'm going to go and
first decide on the format. So if you go
over here to the column tools, you can
see that we have format for the dates
and in PowerBI we have a lot of formats.
I'm going to say the standards is going
to be this one. So the year, then the
month and day depend of course on the
region. But this one is compacted and
small. Look at this. It is not taking so
much space. So that means this is going
to be the standards on how to show the
format inside the data model. Now we're
going to do very annoying task where I'm
going to go through the whole data model
and make sure that all the dates are
using this format. Now of course you can
pause the video and do it. I'm going to
now fast forward just to make sure this
video don't explode. So, I'm going to do
this pretty fast. So, let's go.
So, that was the last fact in our data
model and with that we have now the same
format for the whole data model. Now,
there is another thing that I usually do
in this phase as well since we are now
going through all tables. When PowerBI
sees a column as a number, it going to
make it automatically like aggregable.
So that means if you use it inside your
report, PowerBI going to automatically
like summarize all the values. This is
of course nice thing but sometimes we
have numbers where it makes no sense to
summarize. So it's really nice if you
clean this in the data model before
going to the next phase so that people
don't make any mistakes. So now what
we're going to do, we're going to go
through all the tables one by one and
always keep your eye on this icon. That
means this column could be aggregated.
For example, here the budget can see
here the summarizations it is sum. If
you don't want it to get summarized,
you're going to go over here and say
don't summarize. So now we have to make
decisions almost for all your numbers.
I'm going to say for the budget it makes
sense of course to make maybe an
average. So I'm going to leave it as it
is. For the customers, well I'm going to
say maybe makes sense to make an average
out of this. So this is okay. So let's
go through all the dimensions. Same
things for the products. So that was the
last table, the last column. And with
that all dates inside my data model is
following the same format. All right. So
that's what the first step. We made sure
that we are following the rules and the
standards on the format and everything.
Now we're going to go to the next step
that I usually do with that. I go and
create the dimension date. There are
many different ways on how to create
this. I usually do that in the back end.
So if I have a database or data bricks,
I go and create the dimension there. But
since now we are just doing PowerBI, I'm
going to show you a way on how to create
it directly in your data model. Uh there
is a really nice way, I'm going to say
very smart way actually from PowerBI.
Now I will not go and give you like a
CSV file or text with all dates inside
it and say hey this is your dimension
but this time we're going to go and
create it by getting inspired from the
data model. So how we going to do it?
You're going to go over here to the home
and here in the ripon we have something
called new table. So what we are doing
here we are like creating a new table
inside the data model and we're going to
go and call it since this is the
dimension dimension date. Now there is
very cool function in PowerBI called
calendar auto. So read this. It returns
a table with one column of dates
calculated from the model automatically.
And this exactly what it does. It go and
scan the whole data model. Understand
the range of our business. So understand
what is the earliest date and what is
the latest date and just create one
column based on that. Very very cool. So
actually that's it. We don't have to
give it any arguments and hit enter.
Amazing things. So look at this. The
earliest date is the 1st of January 2025
and the latest date is the end of 2026.
And of course this my friends going to
expand automatically as the business
grow. So that means if the data sets
like grow over the time and you have
2027 you don't have to deal with the
dimension date because it going to grow
automatically. So suddenly you can have
as well in the dimension date 2027. I
can tell you this is magic really. In my
old days as I done business intelligence
with other tools that was one of the
biggest struggles where I had like a
manual table and I have to always add in
new years and stuff like that and I can
tell you many people forget to update
their dimension date and of course this
cause a lot of problems in the report
because almost on each report you are
doing like analyzes over the time and
you will be using this dimension. So
this is one of the most important
dimension compared to the others. And if
you don't make sure it is always up to
date, it's going to be catastrophic. But
now we don't have to deal with all this
chaos. PowerBI did solve this and
everything now is automatic. Just some
trauma from my old days. All right. So
now what do we have? We have only like
one column. Right? Now what you can do?
You can go of course and change the
format to our format. So we need only
the date. We don't need the hours and
time. And of course in the next step if
you want to go and expand this dimension
to add more columns like for example the
year, the month, the day, the full name
of the day, the full name of the month.
So you can add a lot of things to this
dimension by just going and adding like
a new column. Like for example, if I
would like to get only the year, I'm
going to do something like this year
equal and then use the function year and
specify here the column. So this going
to be our dimension date and that's it.
So with that we have the column called
year and I can do the same thing. So I'm
going to go and duplicate it. So that we
have the years. We can go and create
another one for the month. Same story.
So month equal the function month in
order to extract this part our column.
So my friends we have a lot of date
functions that we could add in order to
expand this dimension. But I'm going to
leave it like this. Now of course the
big question is how we going to connect
this new dimension to our data model. So
we have it over here and there are like
many places where we could connect this.
Almost all our facts has dates right
now. The thing is we have a lot of fact
tables inside our data model that have a
lot of date fields. And this dimension
date can play a very important role in
order to make the bridge between all
those facts. This going to be shared
dimension that going to help us in order
to compare all those numbers from
different facts. So this is going to be
our biggest shared dimension in the
whole model. So how we do it? It's very
simple. We're going to go through the
facts one by one and start connecting it
to our dimension. So here we have the
fact sales target. We grab the date and
connected to our dimension date. Okay.
Same thing we go to the next one. We
have as well date. So we connect it our
dimension. All right. So now we have
like a shared dimension between those
two and we can go and compare now the
numbers between those two facts. Now we
have here this factless fact. It is a
little bit weird. We don't have a date.
So that's why we will not connect
anything here. Let's go to the next one.
Here we have a month as well. We can go
and connect it to our dimension. Let's
go. And of course, the most important
one over here. We have the fact sales.
So, we have the order date. We go and
connect it and say save. And the last
fact table here, we have a lot of dates.
So, for example, I'm going to go and
grab the order date to the dimension.
So, now look at this. Our dimension date
is actually a big shared dimension
between a lot of facts. Now this is
amazing because now we can do a lot of
analyszis side by side from all those
facts. Let me just show you an example.
Let's go to the report view. Don't know
how we're going to do it. Now very
important as usual in order to build the
visual we start first from the
dimension. So the dimension dates this
going to build the access for our visual
and then after that we start picking the
measures from the different facts like
for example the fact sales. We can go
and now grab the total sales and put it
in the view. Perfect. Now we can go to
another one. For example, the fact sales
targets. This one going to be on the
month level. So the visual going to
looks weird. But we can fix it if we
just remove the day from our date. So
that everything is on the month level.
Now we can go to a third fact like for
example the inventories. So let's go and
drop the stocks or the units. This is
exactly my friends the power of the
dimension dates. We can go now and visit
all the facts and compare things side by
side very easily without losing the
numbers. Like you can see here the total
sales is always protected and you can do
now a lot of correlations and
comparison. So this is the main job of
the dimension date inside our data
model. Now of course what else we can do
with the dimension date? We can use it
in order to do role- playinging
dimension. Like for example we have here
huge fact table with a lot of dates.
Right? So we have the order date, the
invoice date, the pay date. Now we can
go and connect our new dimension
multiple times to this fact. Let me show
you how to do it. So let me just bring
this fact here. And now we just grab the
date to the different columns. Like for
example here the pay date of course this
going to be inactive. Then one more time
for the ship date and another one for
the invoice date. And I think the last
one going to be the delivery date. So
look at this. Our dimension date is
playing five different roles for these
facts. But of course you're going to do
this only if you really need it.
Otherwise this going to looks really
ugly. So don't go randomly like
connecting the date for every column.
Sometimes we don't really need it like
for example if I'm just like analyzing
the sales I don't really always to go
and get the dimension date so actually I
can go and build the visual completely
based on the fact sales I have there the
order date I have everything so if your
analysis is based only on one fact table
then we don't really need the dimension
date but only if you are like comparing
multiple fact then we go to the
dimension of course and with that my
friends means we don't have to go crazy
and connect the dimension date every
single date column that you have in the
data model only if it's needed and if
you create something like this then you
have to go and start like building DAX
calculations for each inactive
relationship so that you can use it
actually in your reports but if it is
not needed then don't go and create all
those relations now our dimension date
looks crazy and this is usually how this
dimension looks like at the end so my
friends this is the topic of the
dimension date I usually do it at the
end just to have a big picture first
about all my fact tables and only then
at the end I go and connect the
dimension date. Okay. So now we come to
very important step in data moduling
that a lot of people actually skip at
this phase. We have to go and create the
measures. Now the thing is yes we have a
good star schema we have good structure
everything is connected correctly the
filter direction and all those stuff.
But now if you go and hand this over to
your project team and everyone start
like building on top of it reports and
visuals. Now what could happen is that
multiple people going to go and start
creating multiple versions of
calculations that actually are
calculating the same thing over and over
and nobody going to know which one is
the right one for the data model. Now
another thing that might happen is that
people that are working with the data
model they might not yet develop like
understanding of the grains of your
facts. So for example they might go to
the fact sales and say you know what I
have to go and calculate the total
number of orders. So they go and create
calculation where they're going to count
the order ids which is totally wrong.
The green there is the line of order. So
in order to do it correctly they have to
do count distinct on the order ID. That
means this going to lead to wrong number
even if the data model is perfect. So
that means in this phase our job is not
only to structure and build a perfect
star schema but as well we have to go
and prepare the measures side by side
with our data model just to make sure
that we reduce the confusion. And of
course I'm not saying here we have to go
and now create all the measures for
everything that we have in the data
model. We just have to go and create the
core measurements. But think that we are
sure it going to be reused over and over
in many reports. And by the way not
everyone is working in teams. If you are
solo data analyst this is as well good
for you. I'm pretty sure over the time
you're going to have like multiple
PowerBI projects and you're going to
forget about the grains and the data
model. So you protect yourself making
different versions of calculations and
as well making wrong calculations. So my
friends this is exactly what we have to
do now. We have to go and create a
bundle of measures. All right. So now
how we going to do it? There's like two
ways. Either you're going to go to each
fact and inside them you're going to
start create the individual measures. Or
there is like another way that I like to
do and many others as well is to go and
bundle let's say the major measurements
inside one fake table. Let me show you
how to do it. So we're going to go over
here and say okay new table. Now I'm
going to call it underscore in order to
have it at the top. then measures equal
nothing. With this we got like an empty
table here on the top. And now inside it
we're going to go and start creating all
the measures of the data model. So
that's during creating the reports
you're going to have it all in one place
and it's going to be easy to go and drag
and drop stuff. And if you want to
update your measures, you go directly
here and start updating. So now this is
our new measure that we have. Of course,
we will not connect it to anything. I'm
just going to go and move it here side
by side with the security so that we can
see okay this is my star schema and
those are the let's say the add-ons on
top of it. Now let's go to the maybe
report view and create a new tab. I'll
just start now and create like few major
measures inside our data model. So let's
start with the fact sales like for
example here it's very obvious that's
one of the major measures it is the
total sales right. So how we going to do
it? We're going to go to the measures
over here and right click on it and say
new measure. Then we just create like
very simple DAX calculations. So for
example, total sales equal to the sum of
the fact table sales. And now you pick
the column. So line total and actually
that's it. Now what we do actually after
that we decide like on the format of
this measure like for example I'm going
to have the thousand like separator.
Actually I don't want it as a decimal
number. So I just want it always to be a
whole number. So that everything is
formatted and is ready in order to be
used in my reports. So now by just drag
and drop from this measure I'm going to
get the total sales without worrying
about how this is calculated. So that
was an obvious thing. Then we have to
keep thinking okay what could we
measure? Well very important the total
number of orders. So we're going to go
and create a new measure total orders
equal. Now we want to count how many
orders that we have in the business. So
we're going to say okay count but again
since the grain is line of total we're
going to go and use the distinct count
and we're going to say okay fact sales
the order id. So actually that's it. Now
of course you can think about how we're
going to format it. So it's going to be
as well the thousand's going to be
separated and it is a whole number which
is correct. So if I go drag and drop
same thing I got that total number of
orders which is correct. So as you can
see this is the whole job. We're going
to go through all the facts one by one
and we start creating those measures.
But we have just to focus on the main
things that we are sure that's going to
be used in many reports. Like for
example, we can go and count the total
number of active customers. So there is
like a difference between all the
customers that we have inside the data
model. For that we can go and count it
from the dimension customer. But if you
want to know how many customers are
actually ordering things, then you have
to go to the fact sales. So we can go
over here and say okay new measure total
active customers equal as well distinct
count because we're going to go to the
fact table. So fact sales and here we
need the customer ID. So this is the
count from the fact. Now we can go and
create another one that is actually
counting from the dimension. So base
maybe total customers equal. This time
we can just go and use the count for the
dimension because we don't have
duplicates. dimension customer and here
we pick as well the ID over here same
thing if you have a lot of customers you
can go and start like separating things
with a th00and now what else we can do
we can go to another fact like for
example here we have the fact order
process we can go and calculate the
average number of days from the first
step to the last step so now how we
going to do this measure first we have
to go and create maybe a column let me
just go back over here to the table view
so look at this we have all the steps
and I would like to go and calculate how
many days that we have between the first
step the order date and the last step
the pay date and with that we're going
to get like a new measure for this fact
and in top of it we're going to go and
create a new calculation. So let's go
and do that. First of all we need a new
column because we need calculation on
the row level. So for example this going
to be order to pay. Now we just want to
find the differences between two dates.
So there is a function called date diff.
The first date is the order date. The
second one is the last one. So it's
going to be the pay date. And what is
the difference? we are calculating how
many days not month or year. So this is
the part that we are interesting in and
actually that's it. So look at this. Now
we are getting the total number of days
that it took from the order to the
payment. Now the next step is very
simple. We're going to go and create a
new measure in our collection where
we're going to say like for example
average order to pay equal average. Then
we just go and pick our new measure. So
it is the order to pay. So look at this.
Now we have another measure based on
another fact. But everything now
together. So now if you are building a
report, all what you have to do is to
just go and open this one and start
browsing all the measures of this data
model. But of course again you don't
have to go and sit and think about each
single detail. Just create the obvious
one. Okay. Now I'm going to say for now
I'm going to stick with this. This is a
good collection of measures that we can
hand over together with the data model.
All right friends, now we are getting
very close. We have now the last step in
the last phase. We have to make sure
that our data model is secure. So that
means we have to go and apply the role
level security mechanism on top of our
data model. Let's go and do that. Okay.
So now again we have our star schema. We
have those measures and the last add-on
that we have to add is the security. Now
first of all to make sure that the
security is ready we have to go back to
the power query and make sure that
everything there is ready and clean.
Okay. So this going to be our last table
inside the stage the security. Now
quickly by looking to this you can see
the header informations are not correct.
So this should be the columns and just
we still have to follow the naming
convention. So I'm going to go and
rename things. This is the user email
and this is my friend the region. All
right. Now the last step is that I'm
going to go and grab it actually to the
other supports. So with that I don't
have anything more in the stage that I
have to work on. Look at this. We have
here the dimensions. We have the facts
and the support going to be the security
table since it doesn't belong to those
two. All right, let's close and apply.
All right, now look at this. It start
connects to our data model. But I have
to make sure that it is correct. So
let's go and just remove it. So we don't
need this relationship. And about this
one is actually correct. So now again
let's first understand the security that
we have here. So let's just talk about
it. This is the security. Look at this.
Here we have the user email addresses.
Those are the employees of our business.
and it looks like they are assigned to
specific regions. Now, of course, in
order to build this, we have to talk to
the security officers of our company and
understand how the security works. They
might say, you know what, each employee
in our company is allowed to see only
specific region. Like for example, Nora
can see only the North America. She is
not allowed to see the sales that are
happening in Europe or Middle East. Same
thing for hands. Hans can see only
Europe sales. So, we have to understand
the security requirements before we
start like connecting things. So we
cannot go blindly like making a security
concept for the data model and only
after understanding then we can start
connecting things together and then of
course the next step is to think okay
where are the region informations in
which facts in which dimensions we can
see that now of course it is very
obvious if you go to the dimension
customers you're going to find over here
the region information. So this is a
very good starting point. Of course the
question is how we going to connect this
security to our data model and we
usually do it on top of dimensions
because dimensions anyway go and filter
the fact tables and the security table
going to be filtering this dimension.
Now it's very obvious that we have the
dimension customer where we have the
region over here. So this is a perfect
candidate where we're going to connect
our security on top of this so that the
user can see only specific customers and
this will be filtering as well our
facts. So this is one way on how to
create the security. There is another
way on how to do it is to go to the
geographic dimension as well. Here we
have regions and this one is connecting
as well directly to our fact which is
really as well good candidate that we
could use in order to filter our data
model based on the security. Now how we
going to decide on this? Usually I do it
like this. I go back to the data model
and look to those two dimensions. So I
can see here for example, let me zoom
in. This is the go dimension and you can
see it is connected to the fact sales.
So now if I put the security on top of
this, it going to go and filter only one
fact table. But now the other one the
dimension customer it is actually
connected to two facts the fact sales
and the fact order process. So if I
connect the security on top of this, I'm
going to benefit in order to secure
actually two facts which is of course a
nice thing. So I'm going to go and
decide actually on connecting the
security on top of the dimension
customers just because it secures more
facts for me. But again based on the
requirements we have to do those stuff
and now I saw like some weird scenarios
where people go and say you know what I
want to secure the whole data model
without any reason. So they start like
forcing somehow the data model to use
the security table on top of each facts.
So they start like doing crazy things
like by merging the facts just in order
to get the region column inside each
fact and they destroy the grain because
of this just to add the security at the
end. Maybe this is totally unnecessary.
So always understand the security
requirements and only apply it when it's
needed. You don't have to secure every
single dimension and fact. Like for
example, is it really bad to show the
dimension products for all our
employees? I think it is no harm if they
see the whole data. So that means for
our project, let's say that we're going
to apply the security on top of those
two facts, the sales and the orders. So
now how we going to do it? It's going to
be very simple. We're going to go and
build a relationship between the
security and the dimension. So we're
going to go over here and say okay
region by region one to many
relationship and the filter is single
direction. We have to make sure it is
going in the right direction. Of course.
Well, yes. Look at this. The filter
direction of the security is going to
the dimension and the filter direction
of the customers is going to both the
fact sales and the fact order process.
So, this looks perfect for security. Of
course, the next step is that we're
going to go and start creating the
manage roles. Otherwise, this will not
work. So, it's going to be very simple.
We're going to go and create a new role.
Let's go and call it regional access.
And of course in which table we are
building the security. It's going to be
on the dimension customer and we're
going to write a DAX calculation in
order to secure it. So we're going to go
and switch to DAX. Okay. So this going
to be very simple. We are just writing
the DAX filter expression where we're
going to say okay I want to show only
the rows where the region is matching
the user region. So that means it has to
go and find up what is the region for
our current user. So it is inside the
security table the region. then it
should match the email address that we
have in the security with the user
whoever is opening the PowerBI reports
and for that we have a nice function the
user principle name. So very simple
thing so it is not that hard we are
saying just check each row and ask this
question does the region belong to the
person that is looking at the report if
yes then keep the row otherwise go and
drop it. So it is just a filter
expression that going to help us to
filter the rows based on the region of
course. Actually that's it. Let's go and
save it. Very important that we are
getting green. Now let's go and close
it. All right. So with this we have
applied the role of the security on top
of our data model. But of course we
don't trust until we test. So how we
going to test it? I need one email like
one of the employees. So for example
Nora. I'm going to go and copy its
value. Then go back to the model. And
now we're going to try to view the model
as Nora is opening the report and seeing
it. How to do it? We're going to go over
here and say view as then we have to
specify the rule that we just created.
So the regional access and we want to
see it as another user not as par
because otherwise it's going to take the
informations of my users but we want to
see it as Nura. Okay. So let's hit okay.
Then you can see we're going to get like
a warning. The original access is
activated and we are viewing the object
as Nora email. So now let's go and test.
Look at this. We are already seeing like
less details than before. So the total
sales is not anymore the total number of
sales of the whole data model and we are
seeing only the total sales that is
based on their Nora's region. Of course
we can test this as well by going to the
dimension customer and let's go and grab
the region. So you can see we are seeing
only the North America. So my friends
that means the dimension is working. The
fact table is as well working and of
course the last test. Let's go and
remove this effect. So if I stop
viewing, look at this. Suddenly I'm
going to see the total sale for
everything and as well I'm going to see
all the regions. Of course, now you can
go and pick another email and test that.
But for me it is already working and we
have applied the role security on top of
our data model. All right friends, oh my
god I can say that we are done. We made
it. Just sit back, look at this and
enjoy it because this is awesome. And
remember at the very beginning I showed
you this beautiful chaos and the
nightmare data model where we had the
many to many relationships everywhere.
The filters are going from one table to
another just in all directions. No star
schema. Nothing makes sense. Full chaos.
But now look back to this. We have clean
healthy star schema or let's say galaxy
where we have fact tables and surrounded
with dimensions. Every relationship and
every filter is going to the right
direction. The numbers are protected and
everything is friendly and easy to read.
And I can tell you this one was not an
easy one. That was a really hard project
and complicated. And if you stayed until
the end and you build exactly this data
model with me, then my friend, you
should be proud of yourself. And I can
say welcome to the club with this, you
went with me through the journey exactly
like I do in my projects in my
companies. And I can tell you over all
projects I just met like only a few
people that have this kind of skills
where they can turn a chaos data model
into a clean one because most people
actually don't know how to do data
modeling and they skip it. But my
friends, we are not one of them. We are
the experts that can build a real data
model and this is really a rare skill
that many companies need. So what I
really recommend you is to go and make
this project as your portfolio project.
Of course feel free to use it as your
project. So go and share it as well with
the others in LinkedIn and you can tag
me if you want. But what is way more
important than this, if you are
searching for job and you got
interviewed, make sure to talk about
this project because this is really
rare. It going to makes you quickly
stand up the crowd. And if you got hired
or you are already at the company and
you joined a new project where they have
exactly the data model, the chaos that I
showed you at the start, what going to
happen this time? You will not panic.
You're going to look at it and smile
because you're going to remember exactly
this project and you know what to do. So
now before we close this project I would
like to go through all the most
important points that you have learned
during the data modeling. So let's recap
the first point before you build
anything always take time to analyze
explore and understand you have to
understand the business the processes
the data the more you invest in
exploring the data and understanding the
business the easier things going to be
during building the data model. Then the
second point, always understand the
grain of your tables, dimensions and
facts and say it loudly what each row is
representing. Once you know that you
will not make mistakes as you are
connecting tables. Third point, always
set rules and standards before you start
the projects and always follow them
until the end. All the naming
conventions, the prefixes and so on.
Rule number four, always remove the
unnecessary data from the data model.
This is very important. Always ask, do
we really need those informations for
reporting? Is it really necessary? Never
be the person that's going to leave
things just in case. And the next one,
our goal is always to build the star
schema. All BI projects love that.
You're just going to make your life
easier with the calculations. And of
course, always avoid connecting fact
tables together. Just use a shared
dimension in between. And the filter
directions are always from the
dimensions to the facts. So my friends,
that's it. Yes, this is the whole
project. I really enjoyed making this
project. For a while, I thought that I'm
working at a company. I am not recording
a video and I'm talking to a colleague.
I really had a lot of fun making this
project. I really enjoyed it. Now it's
time for you. So you have to go and
practice on your own. Maybe go and grab
any data model or your own data. Try to
make a healthy data model out of it. So
that's it my friends. I hope you enjoyed
this project with me. If yes, then
support the channel by subscribing,
liking, and commenting. Share it with
others in order to reach nice people
like you. And I'm going to say thank you
so much for watching and I'm going to
see you in the next project. Bye-bye. At
you later, warehouse. See you on the
flippity flip.
[music]