Hey friends, and welcome to this very
unique course to master Python. And of
course, you might ask what makes it
unique and different from all other
Python courses. First, I will not only
share my screen and start showing you
how to write Python code and hope that
you can remember it tomorrow. Instead,
I'm going to show you how Python
actually works behind the scenes, how
Python executes your code step by step,
how your data and values moves inside
your codes, how the functions behave,
how decisions are made. So, I'm going to
explain and break all that complex
concepts into very simple animated
sketches and visuals. Why this is very
important? Because visuals and sketches,
they stick in our head way longer than
code and text. Because we are simply
visual creatures and we remember images
way longer than text or codes. Once you
understand how things works behind the
scenes and the logic, then writing a
code going to be very simple for you.
Now, the second reason why this course
is unique, well, it is taught by me. My
name is Sparrow and I have more than 17
years experience working with Python and
real industry projects. I led one of the
biggest data and AI projects at
Mercedes-Benz and other large companies.
That means you are learning from someone
that's where in the industry for many
years using Python. It's not only
theory, you going to learn how
professional thinks and how we use
Python in real world projects. And now,
who is this course for? Well, it is for
anyone who wants to master Python.
Whether you are a data analyst, data
engineer, scientist, web game developer,
or you are just a student that want to
learn Python for the future. So, it
going to be very generic for any career
and role. And as well, I have designed
this course for total beginners. So, I
assume that you might only heard about
Python and that's it. I'm going to take
you step by step from the very basics of
Python and keep progressing into
advanced Python topics. So, by the end
of this course, you going to feel very
confident using Python in real projects.
So, now my friends, as you can see, I'm
really excited about it.
>> Very, very excited.
>> Because I enjoyed really every moment
making this course. If you are ready,
then join me. It's going to be amazing.
Now, let's go.
All right, friends. Now, I designed this
course in very specific way so that you
don't just jump randomly between topics,
but to make you think in Python. So,
instead of having like chapters, I build
it in thinking layers. So, now let me
show you quickly what I mean and the
road map. So, now of course, the first
step you need to build the foundations
before writing any code. I want you
really to understand what is Python, why
we even use it, how does Python works
behind the scenes. And after the theory,
you're going to learn the basic tools
that you're going to use everywhere in
Python, like the printing, variables,
input, commands. Those tools are very
simple and you're going to use it in
daily basis. Now, after the foundations,
we have two chapters with one goal. You
will learn how to work with the data.
So, you're going to learn all the tools
that you need to work with the two most
common types in real words. We have the
text, we call it strings, and as well
the numbers. Now, why we need this?
Because in projects, we have to do a lot
of things with the data. So, we
transform it, clean it, change the
format, validating the data,
manipulating things, searching,
analyzing, extracting. So, you're going
to learn all those tools to make you
ready to do any task about working with
data. And now, after that, we're going
to move to something deeper. Here we
have three chapters that all focus on
one idea, how to control the execution
of your Python code. In the first
chapter, you will learn how Python
understands the true and false. We call
it the Boolean types. And then you're
going to learn how to build a logic, how
to build conditions. So, you're going to
learn all the operators and tools in
order to build the brain inside your
code. After that, we're going to learn
the conditional statements. So, here
you're going to learn how to make your
code decide based on the logic using
statements like if, else, else if. And
then the last chapter in this category,
we're going to learn about the loops.
And here we have mainly two types, the
for and the while. So, here you will
learn how to automate things instead of
writing the same thing over and over.
So, with those three chapters, you're
going to learn how to have the full
control of your code. And now the next
chapter, we have the data structures.
This going to be the most important
chapter and as well the biggest chapter
in the whole course. Now, you already
learned how to work with data with
single values, but in real words, data
come in collections. So, they come in
groups. That's why you have to learn how
to work with advanced data types like
the lists, tuples, sets, dictionaries.
And of course, here you will be geared
with all tools that you need in order to
work with those advanced types. So, how
to create, how to change, analyze,
combine, how to split, how to iterate,
filter. So, many important topics. And
by the way, this is very important for
job interviews and as well for real
projects. Now, the final layer, we have
the functions. It's all about how to
think like professional Python
developers. So, you have to learn how to
design reusable logic, how to break
complex problems into clean pieces. And
of course, we're going to learn that
using functions. So, you're going to
build your own machine inside your code.
So, my friends, this is the whole road
map. If you go through all the layers
step by step, you're going to have
enough confident to solve most of Python
tasks. And of course, not only by
memorizing the syntax, but by
understanding how Python works. I hope
that you're excited about this because I
am. Let's start with the foundations
with the first chapter and we're going
to start with very simple question, what
is Python? Let's go.
Okay, so now [music] let's start with
basics. What is programming language? So
now imagine that you want to give your
computer a task and you say, "Hey
computer, calculate 5 + 5." Well, your
computer will not understand what is
exactly you're talking about and nothing
going to happen. So we cannot use the
natural human language in order to give
tasks for your PC. So now instead of
that, we have to give the instructions
in a language where the computer
understands it. We write a short piece
of code like for example here in Python,
print 5 + 5. Now the computer going to
understand the instruction and give us
at the result 10. So a program it is
like set of instructions that is written
in a language that computer can follow.
But my friend, not all languages are the
same. Some are made for people and
others are made for machines. So now at
the top we have the natural language.
Like you say, "Hey, please calculate 5 +
5." And we have a lot of natural
languages. We have the English, Spanish,
Hindi. They are easy for us but far too
complex for computer to understand. Now
moving on, then we have the high-level
languages. So they are programming
languages but they are made for human
because they are very simplified,
logical and really easy to write and to
read. And we have a lot of languages
like Python and JavaScript. They are
high-level languages. And now next we
are going lower, we are going to the
low-level languages. Programming
languages can talk directly to the
machines but they are really hard for
humans. It's hard to read, to write and
as well to understand. And here we have
examples like the assembly and the C
language. And now at the very bottom we
have the machine language and this one
is made of binary code, a combination of
ones and zeros. And this is exactly what
your computer can understand but it is
impossible for humans to read it, to
understand it, to write [music] it. So
now if you look at these levels, each
step down it going to bring us closer on
how the machine thinks and each step up
it going to bring us closer on how human
thinks. So now if you're looking at
Python, the high-level language, it is
closer to the natural language than the
machine language. So that means it is
really easy to learn and to write and
it's like an abstraction that hides the
complexity of low-level and machine
languages. So it's like a bridge between
both worlds. So this is exactly what are
programming languages and what is
Python.
Okay, so [music] I would like you to
understand exactly how Python works. So
let's say you open your editor and you
start writing Python codes and you
usually we write the code inside a
Python file with the file extension of
.py. So here you are writing the source
code. Once you run your code, the
computer cannot immediately execute your
instructions cuz it is really high-level
and the computer needs a lower level of
the code. So what happens? There is
something called compiler in Python. It
going to take your Python code and
translate it to another code. It's
called the bytecode with the extension
.pyc, Python compiled. [music] And this
can happen automatically and you will
not even notice it. So what happened
here? The compiler [music] of Python
going to translate the high-level
language, the Python code, to a
low-level language, the bytecode. So as
you can see, it's really hard to
understand the bytecode compared to the
Python code. So now our code is not yet
executed, right? Python just did a
translation. But now before anything to
be executed, what can happen? Python
might as well link some libraries. It is
like pre-written chunks of codes that
helps your code to do something
specific, like working with files,
handling data and so on. Now Python has
everything, the bytecode, the libraries,
and now Python going to run your
bytecode using something called Python
virtual machine. So it's like a software
that can understand the bytecode of
Python and take care of running it. So,
the Python Virtual Machine going to
finally convert your instructions into
machine codes, ones and zero, because
this is the only thing that your
computer can really understand. And once
it runs, you will see at the results,
whatever your program was designed to
do. And now, all those three steps,
compile, translate, and execute, we call
them the Python interpreter. So, it's
like a toolbox that handles everything
needed to [music] run a Python code. So,
again, my friend, you write Python code
in a high language, then Python compiles
it and translate it into the bytecode,
the low language, and then the virtual
machine going to take care of
everything, going to take your bytecode,
some libraries, and then it going to run
it at your computer to see the results.
So, this process happens every time you
run a Python code, and everything is, of
course, automated and [music] behind the
scenes.
Okay, [music] so now, let's talk about
why we should learn Python in the first
place. There are like too many
programming languages out there, so why
millions of people choose Python? So,
the first and most important reason is
Python is very powerful and as well at
the same time, very simple. You can
build really serious stuff with few line
of codes. So, if you compare like Java
and Python, in Java or C++, you going to
write like a lot of lines in order to do
a simple task compared to Python, where
you need only like one or two line. So,
as you can see, Python is very simple
compared to other programming languages.
Okay, moving on to the second reason,
Python is used literally everywhere, and
you can use it in order to build
everything. So, you can use it to build
websites, to automate tasks, to work
with data, to build games, and even
control robots. So, whatever direction
you want to go in tech, you will find
probably Python. Okay, moving on to the
next one, one of the best things about
Python is the community. You are, my
friend, never alone. There are thousands
of developers and experts like me
sharing their knowledge in tutorials or
they are like writing blog posts and as
well developing and sharing free
libraries, open-source projects in
GitHub. And if you are stuck or have any
complex task, I'm sure there is like
someone already solved it and probably
made a YouTube video or a GitHub repo
about it. So, this type of community
makes the language alive and when it
comes to AI, Python is leading the way.
Almost everything you hear about today
like ChatGPT, image generations,
self-driving car models, it's built with
Python [music] because Python has an
incredible ecosystem for AI and machine
learning. So, my friends, that means
that programming language of AI is
Python and if you are interested in the
future, then Python is the right
language. And now because of all these
reasons, Python is one of the most
in-demand programming language in the
world right now. If you check any job
description in the tech world, you will
see everyone across all industries,
finance, healthcare, logistics, car
manufacturing, everyone is requesting
Python skill. So, my friends, Python is
really easy to learn, has incredible use
cases, it is shaping the future with the
AI, it has huge community and it is
amazing for your career. So, this is
exactly why millions learns [music] and
works with Python.
Okay, now the third thing that we need
to do is to go and download Python. So,
open your browser and go to python.org
and then we're going to go to that
download section and here you're going
to see one big yellow button that says
download Python. And then we have like a
version for me now it's like 3.13. You
might see here like higher version that
I'm showing now and that's totally fine.
So, let's go and click on that and then
you will get like the installation. So,
let's go and click on it. And now very
important before we start installing
now, we're going to go and check this
one. So, we're going to say add
python.exe to path. It's just going to
make your life easier, trust me. So, now
let's go to install now and click on
that.
So, with that we got Python in our PC.
So, now what we installed now is the
full Python [music] engine. So, we have
like the interpreter, the standard
libraries, the built-in stuff, if all
those basics that you need in order to
run Python code at your PC. Okay, so now
we have to check whether everything is
installed correctly. So, now go and
search in your system for terminal and
let's run that. Now, here in the
terminal type Python and dash dash
version. Let's go and our system returns
Python with the version. So, if you got
it like me, that's means my friends, we
have now installed Python [music] at our
PC.
And now the next [music] question is
where we're going to write our Python
codes. And here we have two options.
Either we're going to use a code editor
or we can use an IDE. So, a code editor
it is like smart notepad for developers.
So, you're going to have like some nice
stuff like syntax highlighter, auto
complete, file navigations, many
extensions and add-ons. And we have very
famous editors like the Visual Studio
Codes and Atom. And from the other side
we have the IDE, integrated development
environments. This one is like heavier,
more advanced than the code editor. You
will get a debugger, compiler, version
control and many more heavy stuff inside
it. And a very famous one is like the
PyCharm and the Visual Studio. Be
careful, it's not the Visual Studio
Codes. And now of course the question is
which one we're going to use? Well,
we're going to go with the code editor,
Visual Studio Codes. It is just free,
lightweight, that has more that we need
in order to learn or work with Python.
And I can tell you my friend, this
editor is not only like for beginners,
for someone to learn a programming
language. This one is as well for
professionals. You're going to be using
it in your projects. I use this editor
as well for my real projects. So now
enough said, let's go and get it.
Okay, so now let's go and download
Visual Studio Code. So we're going to go
to code.visualstudio.com.
And once you are there, you can go and
click download for Windows. And if you
are using Mac, you can go to the docs
over here and then to the setup on the
left side. And here you can see for
Linux, for Mac, for Windows. And if you
go to the Mac, you can see as well here
the downloads. So now go download and
install Visual Studio Code at your PC.
After installing the Visual Studio,
we're going to go and open it. And now I
totally understand if this is like a
little bit overwhelming. You have a lot
of icons, menus, and stuff. But don't
worry about it. I'm going to guide you
like step-by-step. So now we have here
like the basic Visual Studio, but we
want to go and upgrade [music] stuff. We
want to go and add like upgrades and
power to our editor. And we can do that
by adding extensions to the Visual
Studio. Now if you go to the left side,
you can see here we have a lot of icons.
One of them called extensions. So go and
click on that. So now what we can do, we
can go and search for add-ons and
extensions to our Visual Studio. So what
you have to do is to go and search for
Python. And now the one that we need is
Python by Microsoft. So click on that.
So this is an official Python extension
by Microsoft. So let's go and download
it. So we're going to go over here and
click on install. And with that, the
extension is installed. This is really
nice one in order to get smart
suggestions, to highlight errors, to run
things easier, and so on. And with that,
we got our first extension in Visual
Studio [music] Code. And now in the next
step, I want you to go to the file over
here in the menu. And then let's open a
folder. And what you're going to do now
is to create a folder where we're going
to put all our Python codes. So make
sure to put it somewhere safe. So we're
going to go and create a new folder.
Let's call it for example
python_learning
and select the folder.
So now the window switched to the
explorer, the first icon over here. And
now we can see in this panel our folder,
[music] the python_learning. And here we
can see all the folders and files that
we are creating in the projects. Great.
Now we have the folder and now inside it
we're going to create our first Python
file. So in order to do that we're going
to go to this small icon over here and
click on that. It's going to create a
new file. Call it whatever you want. So
let's call it hello. And now we have to
tell our system this is not a normal
file. This is a Python file. And for
that we have to use the correct
extension py stands for Python. So hit
enter. And now our system understand aha
this is a Python file. And as you can
see we have here like nice small icon of
Python. Now in the middle here you can
see already our file is opened and the
editor is waiting for you to write
something. And now we are ready to write
our first Python code. And now don't
worry about the syntax what we're going
to write here because I will be
explaining for you everything step by
step. Don't worry about it. So just
follow me now. We're going to write
print. This is a function that's going
to print something in the output. And
after that we're going to go and open
parenthesis. Here as you can see as you
opened parenthesis the editor closed it
immediately because you need it at your
code. So we have opened and closed
parenthesis. And now we go inside them
and we type double quotes. So as you can
see we have now two double quotes
because this is the syntax in Python. So
as you can see the editor here is
helping us and adding stuff. So now in
between of all those stuff we're going
to write something. Like for example we
can say hi this is my first Python
[music] code. Something like this. So
now we have our first code in Python.
And the next step is to go and execute
it. So we're going to go to this play
icon over here and click on it. And now
my friends if you see in the terminal
this message like this I can say
congrats you have written your first
Python code. So now in the terminal you
can see the output of your code. So the
first few stuff is just like where your
file is located. But what is very
important is this message over here.
This is the output of your code. We said
in in code print this message and we got
the message in the output. So, with that
we have told our PC to do something. We
have written here like an instruction,
and our PC did understand what we want
and executed the task. And this is
exactly what is programming. All right.
So, now what is next? We're going to
talk about shortcuts. Now, what you have
done in order to run this code, we went
to this icon over here and clicked on
[music] it. And now, my friends, we want
to be professional, right? We don't want
each time to go and click on the icon in
order to execute our codes. We're going
to go and use shortcuts. So, now we're
going to go to the command section. For
Windows, hit shift, control, and P. And
if you are using Mac, shift, command,
and P. And now we're going to go and
search for the following: preferences.
And then double points, we need the open
keyboard
shortcuts. The one over here. So, we can
see now all the commands in the Visual
Studio and the key binding, the
shortcuts. And now, what do we want? We
want to make a shortcut for running
Python. So, we're going to go and search
for run Python file. So, now we can see
this command, run Python file. And as a
default, Visual Studio will not add any
shortcut for it. But you can add it
manually. So, double-click on the key
binding. And now choose the shortcut
that you want. I usually use the control
R. So, that's it. Hit enter. So, now we
can see our nice shortcut. And the
source you see here, it's user. Perfect.
Now, let's go back to our code. You can
see here in the tab, hello.python. And
now we don't want to hit the play
button. What you're going to do? We will
just going to use the shortcut. So,
control R. And perfect. With that, we
have quickly executed our code like an
expert. All right, my friends. So, with
that we have prepared your PC with
everything that we need in order to run
and learn Python. Now, we're going to
move to the bonus section, to the
luxury. We will going to add some
decorations to our Visual Studio. It is
not a must. It is nice to have. And this
is the style that I like. So, let's go.
Okay. So, now in order to add more
decorations to our Visual Studio, we're
going to go to the extensions and the
first thing that we can add is a theme
for our Visual Studio. There are a lot
of amazing themes for the coloring and
stuff. So, I'm going to show you my top
four themes and the one that I usually
follow. So, one of the very famous one
is called One Dark Pro. This one over
here. This is very famous theme and you
can go and install it and check whether
you like it or not. And if you scroll
down, you can see more screenshots and
informations about the theme and you
have to be careful on the marketplace.
Some stuff are like free to use and
others you have to pay like license. But
for this one, currently it is free.
Another one that is very popular is the
IO. So, this one over here. Click on it
and this one as well very famous between
developers. You can see there is like
light mode, dark mode and like different
coloring. It's really here there is like
no right or wrong and this is as well
for now it's free. And a third one that
is very famous, Monokai Pro. This one
sadly you have to pay for it. But this
is as well really awesome. Like each
time I try it, it feels really
professional. But now we go to my
favorite one. It's going to be Dracula.
So, Dracula and this one over here. So,
click on that. You can try it and if you
like it, you can use it like me. So,
we're going to go and install it. Trust
and install.
And now you can see immediately all the
coloring of the Visual Studio did
change. So, now if you go back to our
codes, you can see the coloring did
change. The print now is green. It is
just clean, beautiful. I just like it.
So, try it out. It is free. Through the
course, I will be using the theme. But
again, it is not a must. Okay, so now
moving on, there is like one more thing
that I like to add is different type of
icons. You can see we have this small
snake here for the Python. But if you
want to go and add some more fancy
stuff, you can search for material icon
theme. [music] The first one over here.
So, click on that. And if you scroll
down, you can see we will get like more
colorful icons and stuff. Again, this is
only luxury, so I'm going to go ahead
and install it. Trust and install. So,
now if you go to the explorer over here,
you can see we have now nice colorful
icon. It is just small stuff. Okay, so
now let's go to the next one. This one
going to be more serious, not only
colors and stuff. So, now go and search
for auto pep 8. So, the first one here
as well from Microsoft. So, now this
extension going to go and automatically
format your code following the standard
format and the styling guide of pep 8.
Now, what is exactly pep 8? It is a
standard on how to format and style your
python code using like a set of rules
that you can follow in order to have
clean, readable, and
professional-looking
python codes. So, we can see here in the
pep 8 styling guide, there are like a
lot of rules that the developers should
follow, right? And what this extension
does is to go and format automatically
your code using the standard style. So,
it is really nice. Go and install
[music] it. And after that, go back to
our code over here. So, now let's add
some few bad styles to our code. So,
maybe few spaces before the parentheses
and after it and as well here. So, this
really doesn't look good. So, now in
order to format this, we're going to go
to the command section. So, shift
control P. So, now we're going to search
for format documents, this one over
here. So, click on it and perfect. You
can see it removed all those unneeded
spaces. And with that, we have
automatically formatted our codes using
standards. And of course, you can go and
create like shortcut in order to quickly
format your code. So, my friends, those
are the add-ons that we can add to our
Visual Studio. And of course, if you
installed something and you don't like
it anymore, you can go back to your
extensions. You can see, we have here
the installed section and you can go and
uninstall your extension. So, my friend,
that's all for now. We have prepared
your setup in order to start learning
python.
And now my friends, to the last bonus,
[music] I have prepared here the full
Python roadmap using Notion templates.
You can go to the link in the
description and you can download it. So,
this is really nice in order to track
your progress. So, for example, you can
see here the main phases of learning
Python. You have beginner, intermediate,
and advanced and as well nice status,
how much you have already covered. And
then below that we have the course
index. Here we have everything. So, we
have the phases, the chapters, and as
well the lessons. Now, we are currently
at the introduction, so it is in
progress. We already covered what is
Python, so it's done. And as well we set
up our environment, so we can go over
here and say this is as well done. Now,
we can go to the next step and say this
is in progress. And this is the first
topic that we're going to cover in
Python, the comments. And as well you
can go and add a plan when you will
learn the next steps. So, it's really
nice way in order to organize your
learning process. Now, you can see here
we have like many stuff like the board.
So, you can see immediately the chapters
that are to be done, how much in
progress, and how much you have covered.
It's called like a combo board. [music]
And once you have planned everything,
you can check the timeline, the
calendar. And as well here we have a
nice charts and how many topics that we
have already covered. So, it is really
great way in order to feel like there is
an achievement. There is like a
progress. So, if you'd like to plan and
track your progress learning Python, you
can go and use my Notion templates.
The first thing that we usually learn
about any programming language is how to
add comments to our code. So, what
[music] are comments? A comment is a
line of text in your code that Python
totally ignores. It is there only to
help us in order to understand what the
code is doing. Okay, so now let's
understand how this exactly works. So,
now let's say that you are coding a
script in Python. And now you would like
to add a comment. So, now in order to do
that we use the special character hash
and after that whatever you want like
for example, start and then you say this
is my code and then an end. So, now once
you execute this, what going to happen?
Python going to say, "Okay, this is not
a [music] code. This is just for the
humans and I'm going to go and totally
ignore it." So, that means actually
nothing happens. It will not affect the
logic inside your code or anything in
the output. It is just a comment for
you. So, now if you say, "You know what?
Why do we need comments?" Now, let's
check [music] this. On the left side we
have a code that is actually working,
but it is kind of mystery, right? There
is like some kind of filtering and we
are multiplying stuff together, but it's
really hard to understand and to read.
Now, if you look to the right side, we
have the same code, but this time we are
adding comments in order to explain the
steps. So, first we are saying, "Okay,
we are loading the data, then we are
filtering the data based on the month
and the region, and then we are
computing the revenue, and at the end we
are finding the total revenue, and we
are displaying it." So, this is exactly
the power of the comments. They going to
make your code understandable, readable,
and professional. And believe me, you
going to thank yourself later once you
come back to your code after a week or
even a year, or someone even from your
team. Once they open your code, they
will see these amazing comments in order
to understand what is the logic of your
code. So, this is exactly why we add
comments to our code. Okay, so now back
to Visual Studio Code, and let's go and
add a comment. So, we going to start
with a simple hash, and then after that
we can write whatever we want. So, this
is a comment. And now if you go and
execute it, you can see in the output we
are not getting anything because Python
at the start sees, "Okay, we have this
hash symbol." So, that means whatever
comes after it, it's for human. So,
nothing to execute and Python can go and
ignore it. And now of course, this
comment that we just created is a
single-line comment. So, this is a
single line, but sometimes in our code
we would like to add more description
and we would like to have like multiple
lines. And of course, we can go and do
that if you start always with a hash.
So, this is multi-line
>> [music]
>> comments. And now we can go and add more
lines of comments. Like we say first
create username, then maybe a second
step we print message
to user, and a third step store data. So
as you can see we have now multi-line
comments. This is really nice if you
have like complex logic and you want to
explain it like step-by-step. Okay, so
now my friend, there are like different
styles on how to place the comments
inside your codes. So now let's see that
in our code we have something like this.
X is equal to 10. Now if I would like to
add a comment for this in order to
explain it, what we usually do is we go
and place the comment on the top. So for
example, we say store the final exam
score. So that I understand okay, I'm
storing now the score 10 to the variable
X. Don't worry about the syntax here,
we're going to learn it in the next
videos. So what we have done, we have
placed a comment on top of our code that
explains the next line of code. And now
there is like another style where we add
comments. Let me go over here and say X
is equal to 9. Now instead of putting
the comment on top of the code, we will
place the comment at the end of the
code. So we're going to say hash final
exam score. So as you can see everything
is in one line and we call this comment
as in-line comments. This type of
comments it is really amazing in order
to give a quick explanation. And we
usually keep it short. As you can see I
didn't say store the final exam score, I
just want to make it quick and short and
say it here final exam score. So now if
you go and execute this, Python will not
go and ignore the whole line because the
line has two things. First we have a
code, so Python going to go and execute
this. X is equal to 9. But the next part
Python going to see okay, we have here
hash symbol, so that means Python going
to go and ignore everything after
[music] it, not the whole line. So
again, if you want to make a long and
detailed explanations, place your
comment above your code and you can go
and add multiple lines and so on. But if
you'd like to give short and quick
explanation or a label, you can go and
place your comment in the same line
exactly at the end of your code. Okay,
so now a quick recap. Comments are line
of text that Python totally ignores. It
is written only for us, for humans, and
we add comments to our code in order to
make it understandable, readable,
professional, and easy to maintain. It
can help you and your team in the future
to understand the thought process inside
your code. So, that's all about uh
comments.
All right, friends. So, now we're going
to talk about the very first command in
Python and the most used piece of code
that you will see everywhere in Python
projects. We are talking about the
[music] print function. So, what is
print? Print is a built-in Python
function that displays a text or a
result in the output screen in order to
communicate something to the users. So,
what this really means? So, now let's
say that you have a Python code and you
are building like an application. Now,
in order to show a message in the
output, we can use the function print.
And the syntax for that is very simple.
We use a function name print and then we
put inside parentheses and double quotes
a message. Like for example, let's say
hi. Now, if you go and execute it, what
going to happen? Python going to go and
execute the function print where it's
going to go and take whatever you
written inside the message and move it
and display it in the output. And that's
it. Or what we are doing is we are
sending a message from our code to the
output in order to communicate something
to the users.
And now, of course, [music] the question
is, what is function? Now, we have like
a dedicated complete chapter about the
functions where we're going to deep dive
into all details step by step, but now
think about the function is like a mini
machine in programming. You give it an
input, it does some work and process
your input behind the scenes, and at the
end it gives you back a result and
output. So, think of it it's like a
coffee machine. You give it the coffee
beans and the water, then the machine it
does the work, and at the output you
will get your coffee. So, you don't
really care about all details how the
coffee machine did make the coffee. It's
enough for you to know what you want to
give the machine and what you are
expecting from the output. And this is
exactly what our functions in Python or
in programming languages. And now you
might ask where these functions come
from. Well, we have three main sources
for the functions. The first one is the
built-in functions. They are functions
that come with Python out of the box.
You can just use them anytime you want
inside your code. For example, we have
the print function. That's why I said it
is built-in function. And we have other
functions like the input, the length
function, max, and so on. Now, the
second source of functions, we have the
third-party [music] functions. They come
from external libraries like Pandas,
NumPy, PySpark, Plotly, and so on. Those
libraries are developed from third
party, from someone else. It's not from
Python, but still [clears throat] you
can install them and use them in your
code. And now the third source of
functions, we have the user-defined
functions. These are the ones that you,
my friend, create. So, you can go and
build your mini coffee machine. But now,
my friends, we are focusing only on the
built-in functions for now, and we are
learning those important functions that
comes from Python. Like we are learning
now the print function. Okay, so now
back to Visual Studio and let's practice
this function. Let's start with
something basic. So, we're going to use
the function name print, and then we're
going to open parentheses and close it.
And now in between we have to go and
give the message, and we're going to do
that using double quotes. And now we are
ready to put our message, and you can
write whatever you want. So, for
example, hi Python. And that's it.
That's all. Let's go and execute it. Now
you can see in the output we have as
well the same message, hi Python. So,
this is the most basic form of the print
[music] statement. We are just telling
Python print this message to the user as
it is. And now, my friend, there are
like many special things that we can do
inside [music] the print, and I'm going
to walk you now through them one by one.
So, the first thing is that we don't
have to use always double quotes. We can
go and use a single quotes. And inside
them, we can go and write again any
message. So, if you go and execute it,
same thing going to happen. Python going
to go and print the message. So, you can
use single or double quotes. Python
going to accept them as long you are
using the same type at the start and at
the end. So, for example, if I go and
say over here, print, and let's say I
start with double quotes, and then I
say, "Hi." And then I close it with
single quotes. If I go and execute it, I
will get a syntax error. So, use the one
that you like, but always start and end
with the same type. So, this one is not
working. I'm going to go and put it in a
comment. Now, my friends, you can use
the print in order to show anything in
the output. And you can style and design
the output as you want. So, for example,
if I go over here and say, "Let's go and
print, for example, like a lot of
minuses." And then, in between, I'm
going to go and say, "Print and few
spaces, learn Python." And as well, few
spaces. It's like I'm making a title,
and at the end, I will have as well few
minuses. So, now, if you I go and
execute it, I will get this cool design
in the output. It's like a banner or a
title or whatever. So, you can go and
have fun with the print in order to
design anything in the output message. I
just found this nice sketch in the
internet of printing a dinosaur. So, you
can see, you can use your imagination in
order to draw something using print
[music] in Python.
Okay, so now we're going to talk about
special characters in Python. Now, we
have a lot of characters that has no
special meaning in Python, like regular
letters, A, B, Z, and numbers, 5, 9, 0,
and as well, a lot of symbols, like at
and question mark. They don't mean
anything special, and they are treated
as normal text. But now, in Python,
there are characters that have special
meaning when you are writing text. They
all start with backslash, and once
Python sees those characters, it's going
to understand immediately, "Aha, we have
to do something extra." So, they have
special purpose. So, now let's say that
we have this text. So, we have a
sequence of characters, numbers. This is
for Python is totally normal, and
there's like no extra job to be done.
But, now if we put slash before the N,
then what we have done, we just broke
the normal sequence. And now Python
going to see special combination between
the backslash and N, and this has a
special job where Python going to go and
create a new line. So, what we have done
here is, we have escaped a normal
sequence. And we have in Python
different ways of escape sequences,
[music]
like for example, we have the backslash
under double quotes, or a backslash with
a single quotes. We use them in order to
include those quotes in the text. And we
have as well double backslashes in order
to include a real backslash in the text.
And then we have the backslash and N in
order to create a new line in the
output. And as well, a backslash and T
in order to add horizontal tab, just to
have like spaces between words. And as
well, we have the backslash and B for
backspaces. All right. So, now let's go
back to our code in order to understand
exactly what this means. Now, let's say
that I would like to have in the output
double quotes. Like for example, I'm
going to say over here, "Hi Python."
But, I'm going to go and put Python into
double quotes, cuz I would like to see
that in the output. Now, if you go and
execute it, you will get an error. So,
you can see Python saying, "Okay, in
your file, there is something wrong with
your print. It's an invalid syntax." So,
let's go and check our code. You can see
Python is now like in different color.
It is not inside our message anymore,
because Python going to say, "Okay, this
is the first message." It start with the
double quote and ends with the double
quote, and then there is something
called Python. It will not understand
what you mean with that, because it is
not inside the message. And then we have
another message where it start and ends
and inside it there is nothing. So you
cannot do that. So now how we going to
fix this? We have to tell Python in some
way that this double quote is the
content of the message. It's not the end
of the string. It's just part of the
message and we can tell that for Python
using the magic of the backslash. We can
use it in order to skip a sequence. So
now how we going to do it? Exactly
before that double quote, the one that
is part of the message, we going to type
a backslash. So now we can see we are
getting like different color and with
that Python going to say, "Okay, there
is something to skip here." The double
quote that comes after the backslash, it
is not the end of the message. Now we
are not done yet. We have as well this
double quote after Python. This one
should be as well skipped because it is
part of the message. So we going to add
as well a backslash for it and with that
Python going to understand, "Aha, this
is the content of the message." And the
last double quote, we don't have before
it any backslash. Python going to
understand, "Okay, this is the end of
the message." So if we go ahead and
execute it, you will see in the output
we have hi Python and Python inside
double quotes. So again, by looking to
this, the first double quote is the
start of the message. So Python
understand, "Okay, I have to print
everything after it." Then the second
double quote, we have before it a
backslash. Python going to understand,
"I have to print it. So it's not yet the
end of the message." The third one is
the same story. Python going to see
before it there is a backslash. So it is
as well the part of the message. And the
fourth one, we don't have a backslash
before it. So it is the end of the
message. This is exactly how Python
going to read this print. [music] Now
there is like another way in order to
have double quotes in the output. You
can go and use the other type with the
single quotes. So you say, "Hi Python."
And you can put Python in double quotes.
So
if we go ahead and execute it, it will
work as well because you are using at
the start and at the end single quotes
and this will be working. And of course
if you want to have like single quotes
in the message, it will not work. So, if
I go over here and execute it, you will
see we will get an error. So, in order
to have the single quote in the output,
you have to go and use as well the
backslashes. And if you go and execute
it, it will be working. So, that means,
my friends, you can use the backslash in
order to skip a character to tell Python
this is a part of your message,
especially if you want to use the same
type of quote in the message in the
output. Now, the escape character, the
backslash, can help us in many
scenarios, like for example, let's say
that I would like to go and print the
path of something. So, I'm going to say
path, double points, and we can say the
path looks like this. The folder is C,
and then we have the folder users, and
then the folder of the user barra. Now,
if I go and execute it, you will see
again I'm going to get an error. It says
there is something wrong in the syntax.
So, what is going on over here?
Backslashes are always a special
character in Python, and each time you
use them, Python going to think you are
telling something. So, for Python is not
understanding what to do with this
character B after the backslash. It's
not a command because Python going to
expect from you using the backslash to
do something, like skipping special
character or making a new line and so
on. So, now in order to tell Python this
is actually the content of my message,
you have to have a double backslashes.
So, that's we are telling Python, "Hey,
I want to have a real backslash in the
output. I'm not using this one in order
to skip any character." And this is the
only way in order to print a backslash
in the output. The same thing over here.
Now, if you go and execute it, and now
Python going to say, "Aha, okay, I
understand you. [music] You are just
using the backslash to be printed in the
output. You don't have any extra command
for it." So, in order to have a real
backslash in the output, you have to use
double backslashes. As I told you, there
are a lot of special things about the
print and the backslashes. Let's have
the following scenario. I'm going to go
over here and say message one and then
I'm going to have another print message
two. So now if you go and execute it, I
will have those two messages in the
output. Now if you say I would like to
have like space or like divider a blank
between those two messages in the
output, of course you cannot go over
here and add a blank between the two
prints and execute it and then expect to
have as well blank in the output. This
of course will not work because in the
line number two, there is nothing to do
for Python. So it will not go and print
like blank. Now there is like two ways
in order to do that. Either you can go
and say print and then you don't put
anything inside this print. So there is
no message. It's [music] blank. If you
go and execute it, you will have here
like space between them, but there is
like smarter way in order to have a
blank or a new line in the output by
using as well backslash. So how we can
do it? We can go and get rid of this
third print [music] and now just at the
end of the first message, we can go and
use backslash and then the character n.
So now the combination of the backslash
and n, you are telling Python at the end
of my message go and create a new line,
new empty line. So if you go and execute
it, you will get the same results. The
first print going to go and print the
first message, but at the end of this
message we are telling Python to go and
create an extra new line. Now this is
exactly what we have here a new line.
This one came from the first print and
then after that we have the third line,
the message two. This came from the
second print because Python going to
create a new line for each print. So
this exactly how it works and if you
say, you know what? I would like to have
like three new lines. So all what you
have to do is to put them after each
other. So backslash n backslash n. If
you go and execute it, you will get here
three blanks, three new lines. So this
is really nice and now of course you can
go and put everything in one print. So I
can take the message number two and put
it exactly after the the three lines and
then I can get rid of the second print
[music] and execute it. So, what is
happening here? We have the message
number one. This is [music] the first
line. Then, we have a new line that came
from the first n. Then, a second new
line came from the second [music]
backslash n. And then, a third line came
from the third backslash n, but it's not
empty because after it, we have
immediately a new message. So, in the
third line, we have message number two.
And now, if you don't want to see any
empty or blanks between those two
messages, but you want to have
everything in one print, you can go and
get rid of two new lines and leave only
one. So, if you go and execute it, you
are having two messages in the output,
but each message has a new line, and
that's because of this backslash n. So,
these two prints going to give you
exactly the same result as this one over
here. So, this is really amazing use
case for the backslash. We can compact
everything in one print, and we start
splitting the messages using backslash
n. Okay, so now I have one more thing
about the backslash for you. We can use
it in order to add a tab space between
the words. So, let me show you for
example, if you go and remove this
backslash n and go and execute it. Of
course, you can go over here and add
like space in order to make separation
between the words, as well you can go
and use the backslash. So, now, in order
to add a tab in [music] Python, you can
use backslash t. So, now, once Python
sees this combination, backslash and t,
it going to go and add a tab. So, if you
go and execute it, you can see we have
now a tab between [music] those two
messages.
Okay, [music] so now I have a challenge
for you. Now, I want you to print in the
output the following: your learning
path, and then we have three bullet
points. So, Python basics, data
engineering, and AI. But, very
important, those bullet points, they do
not start immediately as a new row. They
have like a tab before them. It just
looks nice, right? But, now the real
challenge here is to have only one
print. Now, pause the video and go and
do that.
Okay, so I hope that you have done it.
Now, we're going to do it together. So,
we're going to go and use print only
once. I'm not allowed to use multiple
prints, and then double quotes. So,
let's start your learning path.
Double points, and now we need the first
bullet points, Python basics. But now,
if I go and execute it, I will have
everything in one line, but I would like
to have Python basics as a new line.
That's why I'm going to go exactly over
here and make a backslash and n. So, if
I go and execute it, I will get it in
one new line, but we are not there yet.
I have to have like a tab. So, exactly
after the new line, we're going to have
a tab. So, backslash t, and if I go and
execute it, I will get my tab as well.
So, perfect. I have my first point.
Let's go to the second one. We're going
to have as well minus data engineering.
So, if I go and execute it, everything
going to be in one line. Backslash n,
backslash t, and execute it. So, with
that, I got a new point in a new line,
and as well, I have a tab before it.
Now, we're going to go to the last one.
So, minus AI, and if I execute it, I
will see it exactly after the
engineering. I don't want that. I want
it in a new line, and as well, with the
tab. So, if I go and execute it, I will
get the last point in the output. So, as
you can see, the backslash gives me a
lot of flexibility in order to put
everything in one print, and I can
control exactly how to design the output
of my message. Okay, my friends, now to
the last technique. As you can see over
here, our message is not really nice,
like everything in one big line, and you
have to scroll left and right to see the
whole message. Now, if you have like a
long message, and you don't want to put
everything in one big line, you can go
and split your message into multiple
lines, and as well, using only one print
function. So, now, let me show you what
I mean. Your learning path going to stay
over here, and then, in order to see the
rest, I'm going to go and hit an enter
in order to go a new line in my codes.
But as you can see, things going to get
red, right? But, I'm going to go and
keep doing that. So, for the second
message, a new line, and for the third
one, a new line. Now, of course, if I go
and execute it, you will get an error
because Python will not allow it. Now,
in order to fix this, we can use the
triple quotes. So, now, at the start,
we're going to go and add triple quotes,
and as well at the end, we will add
triple quotes. Now, you can see in our
code, we don't have anything red
anymore. And if I go and execute it, you
will see it is working, but we are
getting as well extra new lines. So,
actually, if you're using triple quotes,
if you start a new message using a new
line in your code, it's going to be
considered as a new line. So, that means
we can go and get rid of the new lines.
So, we don't need those backslashes and
n. And if I go and execute it, I will
get the exact same results. So, this is
really nice way in order to add multiple
lines in your code, and as well multiple
lines in the output using one single
print. You can do that only if you
introduce three quotes. All right, my
friends. So, with that, I have covered,
let's say, the most important tips and
tricks that we can use inside the print.
It is really fun in order to design an
output [music] for your users.
Now, my friend, [music] if you are a
total beginner in Python, I know that
you will have always the same question.
Why do we need this stuff? How we going
to use what we are learning in real
projects? Let me show you real use cases
in projects for the print function. So,
for example, we have this code. You
don't have to understand all details,
but I want you to understand the use
case of the function. So, now, we have
here a lot of values and calculations
and logics. Now, if you run this code,
you will not get anything in the output
because everything is happening behind
the scenes, and we don't have like a
window to what is going on. And this is
exactly when we need print. [music] Now,
in order to see more what is going on in
our code, and to see inside the box,
what you're going to do, you're going to
go and print the last results. So, I'm
going to go go say, "Final total" double
points, and then the final
total. So, So, if I go and execute it,
now you can understand, "Aha, the final
total is this value." So, we do it like
this in the projects. In order to see
the results, we use a print. So, we are
sending the value from our code to the
output. Now, let's see that there is
something wrong. I'm not really sure
whether this value is correct. And in
our code, we have like many steps. And
here again, we use the function print in
order to understand each sub step. So,
for example, I can go and place a print
in between here. And now this time we're
going to say here,
"Subtotal is equal to as well subtotal."
Now, my friend, don't worry about the
syntax and what is going on here. I just
want you to understand when we use print
in real projects. So, now if I go and
execute it, now I can see and
understand, "Aha, the subtotal is this
number." And this might help me to
understand the sub steps inside my code
and whether my calculations are correct.
Now, I can see the subtotal, and maybe I
want to see as well the discount. So,
I'm going to go over here as well and
print as well this intermediate result,
the discount. So, discount, and as well
execute. So, now I see a lot of stuff,
the subtotal, the discount, and the
final total. And actually, the
calculation is correct. So, my friends,
this is a very important use case in
real projects. We use it in order to
print the results of our calculations in
the output. That's going to make things
more transparent for us and going to
help us in testing or debugging if there
wrong in our calculations or logic. So,
this is how we use print in real-world
projects.
Okay, my friends. So, now let's do a
recap. Print is a built-in function in
Python, and we usually use it in order
to communicate something to the users,
to show the progress and the steps of
your logic in your code. And as well, we
use it in order to debug and test. So,
the print function is very simple, but
yet very powerful. And my friend, I'm
going to promise you something that you
will end up using the print function in
[music] every Python scripts from the
day one in the beginner level until the
very advanced levels in Python, you will
end up always using print. [music]
So, now we're going to talk about
fundamental and very important [music]
concept in Python. We have the
variables. So, what is a variable? A
variable is a name that you create to
store value inside it in order to reuse
it later in your program. So, think
about variables like a box, and you give
for this box a label like a name for it.
It could be anything like a username, a
country, and X. And we can put stuff
inside this box. Anything you want like
a number, a string, maybe a logic or
calculations.
So, now once you have stuff inside this
box, you can move this box everywhere in
your code, and you can use this stuff
wherever you want inside your code. And
of course, anytime you want, you can go
and box, take everything out from it,
and put the new stuff inside it. And
then again, you go and close the box and
start using it around in your code. So,
this is what we mean with variables.
>> [music]
>> All right. So, now as usual, I'm going
to show you a sketch in order to
understand how Python execute variables
behind the scenes. Okay. So, now again,
we have our code and the output, and we
would like to go and create a variable.
So, we say the variable name is X, and
we want to store the number one inside
it. And we call this assignment. That
means we are assigning the value one to
the variable name X. So, now once we
execute it, what's going to happen?
Python going to go and create, let's
say, a box and call it variables. This
box going to be storing like values and
data in the memory that is ready to be
used whenever we want. So, Python going
to create in the memory variable called
X, and will assign for this variable the
value one inside it. So, so far what we
have done, we have created a variable,
we have assigned for it a value, and now
what is left is to use this variable.
So, let's say for example, we use the
function print, but now inside the
parenthesis, we will not use any value,
we will use the variable name. So, now
if you go and execute it, Python cannot
go and immediately print the value in
the output. First, Python has to go and
get the value of the variable. So, it's
going to go and search in the memory for
a variable called X, and once it finds
it, it's going to go and return and
reads its value in order to use it in
the print. So, now during the execution,
instead of having X, we're going to have
one. Now, we have everything ready for
the print. Python going to go and print
this message in the output. So, you will
see in the output one. So, this is
exactly how we work with the variables.
We create one, we assign for it a value,
and then reuse it later. And now, let's
say that in the next steps in my code,
we have to update the value of this
variable. So, we want to say forget
about the one, go and store two instead.
So, it's very simple. In order to update
the value, we're going to use the same
syntax. So, we're going to say X is
equal to two. So, now once you execute
it, Python going to go to the variables
and see, "Aha, I have already an X." So,
Python doesn't have to create a new one.
All what can happen is that it's going
to go and update its value. Instead of
one, we're going to have two. So, that
means from this point, X now is equal to
two [music] inside the memory. And now,
for example, if you go and print the X
again, the same thing going to happen.
Python going to go and search for the X.
At this time, it's going to find it two
inside it and returns it to your code,
and Python going to print two instead of
one. Okay, so now let's keep going. Now,
I would like to create a new variable
called Y. And now, as usual, we would
like to assign for it a value. At this
time, we will not assign a direct value
to it. We going to assign for it like a
calculation. So, we're going to say the
value of Y going to be the result of X
plus three. So, now if you go and
execute it, Python cannot go and
immediately and create the variable Y.
First, it has to do the calculation. And
now, in order to do the calculation, we
need to find the value of X. So, again,
Python going to go and access the
variables in order to find the variable
X, and then it going to read its value
back to your code. So, now we going to
get the two inside our code, and now
Python can do the calculation. So, 2 +
3, the result going to be 5, and now it
has everything in order to create the
variable. And Python going to go and
create a new variable called Y and
assign for it the value 5. And now, if
you check the variables box in our
memory, we have two variables, and each
of them holding a value. And you can use
them anytime you want in your program in
order to do calculations, comparisons,
to display them, anything you want. So,
for example, I can go and print the Y.
So, Python going to search for the
variable Y and return its value, and
then print it in the output. So, this
exactly how we work with the variables
inside our code, and this is as well
exactly how Python execute the variables
behind the scenes. And of course, if you
want in the future more content like
this for free, then support the channel
by subscribing, liking, and commenting.
This is going to really help pushing on
that channel to reach nice people like
you, and as well, it going to push on me
to make more content for you. If you
would like to support more, then you can
go to that Data Academy, and as well,
you can purchase my courses there. In
that Data Academy, it going to be easier
to follow the structure because it is
designed for courses, and YouTube is
actually not designed for that. So, you
going to find a clean structure, and you
can follow the progress, and at the end
you're going to get the certificate of
completion. And as well, I have there
quizzes and tasks to challenge your new
skills. So, now, let's go back to the
course.
>> [music]
>> Okay, so now back to our code, and I'm
going to show you exactly why do we need
variables. So, now let's go and print
free stuff. Like, for example, print,
and I'm going to say, "My name is Bara."
And of course, you can go and use your
name. You don't have to use mine. Let's
go to the second print, and we're going
to say Bara is learning Python. Now,
we're going to go to the third one, and
we say print Bara wants to become
Python expert. So, that's all. Let's go
ahead and execute it. And we can see our
messages exactly like in the print. So,
my friend, this is working, but we still
have an issue. Now, let's say that I
would like to go and change the name
from Bara to Maria, for example. Now, to
do that, you have to go everywhere and
start manually changing the name from
Bara to Maria, right? And this is of
course not really smart. Imagine you
have like a big complex code. You have
to go everywhere and start changing the
values. So, for sure, this going to go
out of control. But now, if I go and
execute this, I will get Maria instead
of Bara. Now, we don't want this. We
want to make it smarter, right? So,
let's get everything back like before.
And this time, we're going to use the
power of the variables. So, let's go and
create a new variable. Let's call it a
name. So, this is the variable name. And
now, we want to go and store inside it a
value. So, in order to do that, we're
going to use equal. And after that,
we're going to have double quotes, and
we're going to use the name. So, again,
this is the variable name, and this is
the value that will be stored inside the
name. So, we are assigning a value. So,
with that, we have created a variable,
and we assigned for it a value. The next
step we want to go and use this
variable, right? So, what I'm going to
do, I'm going to go and copy the whole
thing and put it below the variable. So,
now, what we're going to do, we're going
to go and replace all those static
values of the first name, Bara, and
we're going to replace them with the
variable name. So, we're going to have a
name here, as well here, and here. But
now, if you go and execute it, what
going to happen? You will see in the
output, "My name is name." And that's
because the variable name is inside the
double quotes, and Python going to think
this is just a text. Now, how we going
to tell Python this is a variable? This
is not a part of the message. So, that
means in one print, I I to have like
static part, and another part that is
dynamic using the variables. So now in
order to do that, we use the comma, and
then after that, we use the variable
name. So we're going to go and get rid
of the static parts, and now you can see
the name is outside of the static parts,
so it's not inside double quotes, and
Python can understand, okay, this is a
variable. So now if you go and execute
it, you will see over here, my name is
Bara, and this value came from the
variable. Now one more thing that you
might notice that there is a space
between the static parts and the
variable, and this space here, it comes
from the comma. So each time you use a
comma, Python going to go and
automatically add a space between the
parts. So now let's go and fix the
second message. By looking to this, what
is the dynamic part and what is the
static part? Is learning Python is the
static part, and the name is variable.
So in order to fix it, we're going to go
and remove the name from here, and this
time we're going to put the variable at
the start, and then split it from the
static part using a comma. So variable
is learning Python. If you go and
execute it, you will see here, Bara is
learning Python. And with that, we made
the first part of the message dynamic.
And the same thing for the third
message, wants to become Python expert
is the static part, and the first part
is the dynamic using of course the
variable. So now if you go and execute
it, you will see in the output,
everything is now working correctly. So
now I'm going to show you exactly why do
we need variables. At the start in the
first section, you saw me changing the
values manually. So I go in each print
and start modifying the values, and this
is really annoying, right? But now after
using variables, all what I have to do
is to go and change the value only once,
only at the variable. So now let's see,
instead of having Bara, we're going to
go and use Maria, and if I go and
execute the code, you will see
everything change as well in my code. So
my name is Maria, Maria is learning
Python, Maria wants to become Python
expert. So you can see now Maria
everywhere, And this is exactly why do
we need variables. We go and create it
in one place, and then we reuse it
multiple times inside our code. And if I
want to change something, I change only
the variable, and this going to affect
the whole code. And now I would like to
show you something quickly. If I go and
say name is equal, and let's say I'm
going to go and put my name here. So,
that means I'm assigning a new value to
the variable name. And if I go and
execute it, you will see nothing can
happen. And that's because Python
execute the code line by line. So, at
the line five, name is equal to Maria.
At the line six, the variable name
contains the value Maria. And Python has
no idea that later I have updated the
value. And the same thing for the line
seven and eight. Python only knows that
the name is equal to Maria. And only at
the line 10, Python going to go and
update the value in the variable. So,
now if I go and take everything from
here and put it after the updates, and I
go and execute it, you will see in the
third section the name is equal to
Barra. Because at the line 11, now if
Python goes to the variable name, it
will find the value Barra and not Maria
because we have updated. So, this is how
Python works step by step line by line.
Now, let's go and introduce a new
variable to our code. So, if you check
again our messages, we can find another
repetition, and that is the Python. So,
we have it twice here. If you have the
feeling that you are repeating the same
value over and over, you can go and
create for it a variable. So, we can go
and create a new variable called
language, and we can go and assign for
it the value Python. We have to use this
variable inside our code. So, how we
going to do it? In the first print, we
don't have Python, so there is no need
to use it. But in the second print, we
have here Python. Now, instead of having
it static like this, we going to use our
new variable. So, I'm going to go and
remove it. And now after that, we're
going to go and use language. But of
course, we cannot do it like this. We
have to split using a comma. So, now by
looking to our print, we have a
variable, comma, then a static value is
learning, and then {comma} and then
again a variable. So, if you go and
execute it, everything going to be
working. Maria is learning Python. So,
perfect. Let's go and update the last
print. So, now Python is in between like
two static values. So, we can go and
replace this with a variable language,
but we cannot leave it inside two double
quotes. We're going to split things. So,
[music] after become we're going to have
the double quotes and then a {comma} and
after the language we have another
{comma} because the expert is a static
value. But, what is missing here is a
double {comma} in order to have the
right syntax. [music] So, at this time
we have four parts. We have variable,
static part, again a variable, and then
static parts. Let's go and execute it.
So, now as you can see everything is
working. So, now our code is fully
dynamic and we can change stuff very
easily. So, now let's go and change the
values. Instead of Maria, I'm going to
go and use my name and this time I'm not
learning Python. I'm going to go and
learn JavaScript. So, now if I go and
execute it, you can see my name is Bara.
Bara is learning JavaScript and Bara
wants to become a JavaScript expert. All
right, my friends. Now you can have the
feeling that our code is smarter, right?
Our code is completely dynamic and we
have a full control on the values and
this is exactly the power that the
variable gives us. It makes everything
more dynamic and smart inside our codes.
All right, my friends. [music] Let's
have a quick recap about the variables.
Variables is the foundations in order to
make your code dynamic. We use it in
order to create a name and we store
inside it a value and we use the equal
operator in order to assign values to
the variables. And Python keeps those
values inside the memory in order to
have a quick access. And once you create
a variable, you can go and reuse it
wherever you want inside your codes. And
of course, during the execution you can
go and update the value of the variable.
So, my friends, you're going to find
variables in every real world
applications from a very simple script
to advanced one. So, variables [music]
are amazing.
All right. Now, I have [music] the
following challenge for you. You have to
go and print those three lines, but not
only that, take a look to the text to
introduce at least one variable in your
code to make things dynamic. So, now
pause the video and write your solution.
All right, my friends. So, now we're
going to talk about the second most
important function in Python. We have
the input. So, so far what we have
learned is we can use the print in order
to show something to the user. But now
we're going to go and flip things. We're
going to go and get something back from
the user. So, for that we can use the
input function. It is as well a built-in
Python function that lets you get input
from the user. And my friend, this input
function is used almost in any
application or website you are
interacting with. Like, for example, if
you go to LinkedIn, first you have to go
and log in or register. So, the
application wants an input from you. You
can go in here and add your email and
some passwords. So, the LinkedIn is
using an input in order to get something
from the user. And as well the same
thing in ChatGPT, the place where you go
and ask something where you're going to
go and write like a prompt like explain
input function. This window is using an
input function in order to get something
from the user. So, my friend, this
function will be used almost in any
application or website. And we use it in
order to get something from the user.
Okay, so now let's understand how this
exactly works behind the scenes. Now, we
are writing our code and we would like
to get something from the user. So, we
write in our code input and in between
parentheses we write a message. So, for
example, enter a value. Now, if you go
and execute it, what can happen? Python
first going to go and take the message
and display it in the output. So, you
can see in the output enter a value. And
now what can happen, everything going to
pause and wait for an input from the
user. So now our application going to
wait until the user type something. It
could be any value, anything. So for
example, the user enters 50. Now once
the user hits enter, the value 50 will
be returned back to our code, to our
program. So as you can see now we have
like interaction. We are not only
displaying something in the output like
the print. Now we are asking for the
user to give us something. To give us a
value. So this is exactly how the input
works in Python. Okay, so back to Visual
Studio, let's go and practice the input.
So now let's go and ask the users for
their names. So in order to do that
we're going to use the function input.
And now then we open a parenthesis and
now inside it we're going to go and
write a message to make sure that the
user knows we are waiting for an input.
So we're going to give a command like
enter your name and then double points
in order to indicate that we are waiting
of course. So actually that's it. Let's
go and execute it. Now you can see in
the output our message enter your name
but this time the program is waiting for
an input from us. So now everything is
waiting and paused until you give a
value. For example, we're going to go
and give my name Bara. And now as you
can see as I'm typing, the program is
still waiting until I hit enter. So once
I hit enter, the waiting is ended and
the value is returned back to my code.
But now in this example we have an
issue. The value that I gave to the
program is completely lost and nothing
happened because I'm not doing anything
with the returned value. So it is like a
total waste. Now instead of that we're
going to go and do something with this
value, with this returned value from the
user. So what we're going to do, we're
going to go and store it inside a
variable like for example name and then
we're going to go and assign the
returned value from the input to our
variable. So now I'm saying whatever
value that we're going to get in return
from the input should be stored inside
the variable name. But we are not done
yet because okay, we have just created a
variable in the memory and we have a
value for it. But so far we are not
using this variable anywhere. Now, as we
learned in order to use a variable, we
can go and print it. So, let's go and
print this variable. We're going to say,
"You are" So, this is the static part,
and then we can use the whatever value
that is stored inside the variable name.
So, now let's go and test it. Now, again
in the output the program is waiting to
enter your name. So, let's go and do
that and hit enter. And now we can see
another message. It says, "You are" Then
we have our name, Bara. So, again what
happened here? We asked the user for
their name. We stored the returned value
inside a variable, and then we printed
this variable. So, that means we are
getting something from the user, and
then we are printing it back. All right.
So, now let's understand in details what
is hard-coded values and dynamic values
from inputs. Let's go and create another
variable called country, and let's
assign for it your country. So, I'm
going to go and add Germany. So, now by
looking to this, that means we have two
variables. We have the name and the
country. And of course, those variables
needs values. Now, if we check the
country over here, we call the value
Germany as hard-coded value because we
have manually entered this value inside
our code. So, that means the value will
never change unless you go over here,
and you type something else. So, that
means this value is predefined before
the execution. I have written this value
Germany before running the program. So,
that means anyone opens your code going
to see immediately you are storing the
value Germany inside the country. But
now, if you look to the variable name,
no one knows about the value before the
execution. It is not hard-coded inside
the code. The value going to be assigned
during the execution to whatever value
came from the user. So, that means the
value going to be totally dynamic,
depends on the user inputs. It is not
hard-coded. So, now let's make use of
those two variables inside the print.
So, I'm going to go and rewrite the
whole thing like this. We're going to
say name, then comma, and then we're
going to make static parts comes from,
and then we're going to use the country
variable. So, let's go ahead and execute
it. Now, again, we have to enter the
name. Let's say this time we're going to
say Maria and hit enter. Maria comes
from Germany. So, again, the first part
of the message came from the user and
the Germany word here came from our
code. So, if I execute this like 100
times,
>> [music]
>> I will get always comes from Germany,
but I might get different like input
from the users. So, these are two
different ways on how we assign values
to the variables either using hardcoded
value like this or by using an
interactive function like the input
where we're going to make everything
dynamic. So, now using the input and the
variables, you have the feeling that our
code is not only smart and dynamic, but
also interactive. So, this is like an
interaction between our code and the
user. We are asking the user for a value
and then we are getting this value and
doing something about it. So, things are
live and interactive and this is exactly
what we do if we are building
applications. So, my friends, this is
the power of the inputs.
So, so far we have learned many things.
We have learned two built-in functions
in Python, the input and the print, and
as well we have learned about the
comments and the variables. So, now I'm
going to show you how everything works
together behind the scenes. So, now
let's say that you have the following
code and you went and executed. So, as
we learned, Python going to go and
execute it line by line. The first line
is about the variables. So, Python here
going to go and create a new variable
inside the box in the memory called X
and then it going to go and assign for
it the value A. So, A going to be stored
inside a variable called X and that's it
for the first line. In the second line,
we are saying print X. So, that means
first Python have to go and get the
value from the variables. It's going to
go and search for the variable name X
and read and returns the value A back to
your code. So, now we have everything,
the value, and Python can go and print
this message in the output. So, you will
get in the output A. And now Python
going to go to the third line and going
to say, "Aha, now we have like the
special character hash. This means here
it's like a comment. It is a note for
the human. I don't really care about it,
so I can go and skip it." So, nothing
going to happen in the third line. We
made this line only for us. Now, Python
going to go to the next row and here we
have many things. So, we are saying, "I
would like to go and create a new
variable called Y, but the value for
this variable we going to get it from
the user." And in order to do that, we
are using the input function. So, first
Python going to go and print the message
"Enter a value" in the output in order
to tell the user to enter something.
[music] And now everything going to
pause. So, the whole program going to
wait and pause until the user enter
something. So, let's say our user go and
hit P and then enter. Now, this value P
will be returned back to our program, to
our code. Now, Python has a value for
our variable Y. So, now it can go to the
variables box and create a new variable
called Y and assign for it the value B.
Now, to the last line, print Y. The same
thing going to happen. Python going to
go and access the variable Y in order to
get its value, the B, and then go and
print it in the output. So, [music]
again, by looking to this, the value of
X, it is specified and hard-coded inside
our code, but the value of Y, it is
completely dynamic and we got it from
the user. And as you saw, we use the
print function in order to show
something to the user and we use the
input function in order to get something
from the user. So, my friends, with that
you have understood many basic commands
in Python in order to make your code
smart, dynamic, and interactive. So, as
you can see, my friends, programming is
amazing, right?
Hey friends. So, now if you are learning
any new programming language like
Python, you have to understand and
master at early phase one concept, the
data types. [music] So, that's why now
we going to go and deep dive into the
data types in Python and we're going to
start with the first question, what is a
data type? So, now let's say that I got
a box like this and I don't know what is
inside it, but there's like something.
Now, the first question that I'm going
to go and ask myself, should I be
careful with this box? Is it like inside
it glass, electronics, or cookies? Or
can I go and throw it around in my room?
Is it like papers or let's say clothes?
>> Open the box.
>> What?
>> It could still catch a cake. Come on,
get out of there. Get out of there.
>> So, now I'm wondering about the type of
the thing inside this box. And this is
exactly what Python needs to understand
once you present a new value inside your
code. Python want to understand the type
of this value, the type of the data. So,
that it can understand how to treat your
data, how to treat your values. Can
Python go and count it and do like
mathematical operations on it? Or can we
go and combine it or maybe compare it
with other values and so on? So, this is
exactly what are data types in
programming languages. So, now let's
understand exactly what we are talking
about. [music] Let's have this sketch.
Now, you remember if you want to create
a value in a variable like A is equal to
10. So, now what can happen? You will
have like a box and this box has a
label. The label is the variable name A.
Now, inside this box we're going to put
the value. So, our value, our data is 10
and this number going to be stored
inside this box. So, so far we have two
informations, the variable name and the
value itself. Now, we have [snorts] a
third information about this box and
that is the type of the data inside this
box is an integer. So, that means for
different data types now we have
different type of boxes. And the only
thing that define which box we're going
to need is the value itself. So, let's
see how Python works behind the scenes.
Okay, so now let's say that in the code
you said A is equal to 10. Now, the
first thing that Python going to do is
going to check the value. So, it's going
to go and ask itself what type of data
is it. So, that means Python here is
inspecting the values inside your codes,
and it is smart enough to say, "Aha,
this is an integer." And now, Python
behind the scenes has a lot of empty
boxes with different sizes and shapes.
So, now since it is an integer, Python
going to go and choose the right box
with the right size. So, it's going to
go and put the label of A, the variable
name, put the value inside it, and then
put the whole thing in the memory. All
right, so now let's move on. In the next
line, we have another variable called B,
but this time inside it there is hello.
Again, the first thing that Python going
to do is to inspect the value. So,
Python going to check this data and
going to find how we have here like
characters. This is a string. So, it's
going to go and start searching the
boxes for the correct type, and as well
the correct size. And once it's find it,
it's going to put as well a label on it,
the variable name, put the value inside
it, and then move everything to the
memory. But of course, in different
place. Now, moving on to the third
value, we have C is equal to true.
Python going to go and check the value,
and this time it's going to say, "Aha,
this is not a number, this is not
between like double quotes, so that
means this is not a string, and this
value true is a Boolean." So, with that
Python understand the type of the data,
and the same thing happens. Python going
to go and find the right box for this
value, put the variable name, the value
inside it, and move everything to the
memory. Okay, so now we're going to go
and do something tricky, where we're
going to reuse the variable A, but this
time going to store inside it different
type of value. So, we are storing ABC.
Now, previously we have A is equal to
10, so it was a number, but this time it
is a string. So, now what can happen?
Python going to go and check as well the
value, and say, "Aha, this is a string.
We have characters." But we have already
a variable in the memory called A. So,
Python will not go and create like two
variables with the same name. So, what
can happen? It's going to go and grab
the old box and totally destroy it. So,
it's going to remove the variable and
the data inside it and it's going to go
and pick the right box now for the new
value. This time we are talking about a
string. So, it will put the label A and
inside it's going to store the new
value, but this time in a new type of
box. And then, as usual, it's going to
go and put it in the memory, but
together in the same shelves with the
variable B. Now, by looking to this we
can understand Python automatically
detect the type. So, that means in your
code you don't have to go and tell
Python about the data type. It's not
like Java or C++ where you have type
declarations before each variable.
Python is simple and smart enough to
understand the data type. And we have
understood that Python is very dynamic.
You can go and change the data type of
your variables anytime you want in your
code. And as well, we have understood
that our values, our data, will be
stored in different types and as well in
different sizes. Okay, so now let's
understand the real reason why Python
needs data types. Let's say that we have
a value like hello and you go and apply
for it a function called upper. Now, if
you apply this function to this value,
what's going to happen, you will get the
same word, but everything is written in
upper case. So, you will get hello with
all capital letters. Now, let's say that
I would like to apply the same function,
but for the number 50. So, now in this
scenario, what's going to happen, are we
going to go and get like a very big 50?
Well, there is no upper cases for the
numbers and this makes [music] totally
no sense. But, my friend, things don't
work like this. The value hello has a
data type, it is the string, and the
data type of the 50 is integer. Now,
based on the data type, Python going to
restrict which types could be used with
this function. So, if you try to apply
this function to the integer, Python
going to throw immediately an error and
say, "This is not allowed. You can use
this function only for the data type
string." So, that means, my friend,
Python uses data types to make sure you
don't do wrong things on the wrong kind
of data. It's like you are trying to
microwave your keys. Just because you
can doesn't mean that you should.
Now there is a like another reason.
Let's say that we have two values. You
have two and three. Those values are
integers. And now if you use the
operator plus between them, what going
to happen Python going to go and answer
with five. So because they are integers,
Python understands I can go and add
those numbers. But now let's have the
same scenarios, the same values, but you
are using here double quotes. Now for
Python, those values are string values.
And if you go and apply the operator
plus between them, this time Python can
show in the output 23. Well, this time
since your values are string, Python
will not go and apply mathematical
operation between them. All what happens
here is Python is concatenating your
string. It is joining the text. So as
you can see, Python behaves very
differently based on the data type. So
this is exactly why programming
languages needs data types. It use it in
order to prevent you doing something
wrong. And as well, it can understand
how to treat and operate on your data.
Well, there are like many ways on how
you categorize the data types in Python,
but I do it like this. I think about it
like we have three categories, three
baskets. One basket holds one fruit, one
value. Another one holds many fruits,
many values. So this is a second
category. And the third one don't hold
any value. It is an empty basket. So let
me walk you through them one by one. The
first basket, the first group, it is
completely empty. There is nothing
inside it. And in Python we have a
special value for that. It's called
none. Now moving on to the second
category, we have the single value
category. And here we could have values
like 50. And as we learned this is an
integer, but we have another type for
the decimals like for example 3.14. This
is not a whole number we have here
decimals. So the data type of this
numeric value is float. Now moving on if
you are using characters like hello as
we learned this is a string and one more
if you have like true then this is as
well a new data type called boolean. Now
if you are looking to those values and
data types they always hold one value.
That's why I grouped them together this
category. Now moving on to the third
category the multiple values. Here we
have many values like for example 1, 2,
3. You have the data type called list or
let's say that you have like three
values ABC and with that you are forming
different data type called dictionary
dict and we have other types like the
set and the tuple. So as you can see
those data types holds multiple values.
So it's not like the other types where
we have only one value like the integer,
float and boolean and there are like
many different names for this category.
We call it a data structure or
collection. Some other call it
containers. So they are like advanced
data types in Python and they are very
important of course. I'm going to have a
dedicated chapter for that. And on the
other side the single values sometime we
call it primitive data types. They are
the core and the very basic data types
in any programming languages even in SQL
they are very similar. So those are the
famous data types inside Python that you
going to learn through the course. Okay,
so now let's go and create some basic
data types in Python and we're going to
start with the first one. Let's say that
A is equal to 10. Now Python going to go
and check the value. 10 is a whole
number it has no decimals that's why it
going to treat it automatically as an
integer. So this one is an integer int.
Now next let's go and create another
variable and let's assign for it the
value 3.15. Now Python going to say aha
this is a decimal point it is not an
integer anymore. In Python we have
different type for that, it's going to
be the floats. And of course what I'm
writing here is again a comment. We are
not declaring anything, that's enough
for Python. It is smart enough to find
out that data type. Now, the next one,
we learned about it. If you put the
value between two double quotes, you say
for example hello, this is in Python
considered to be a string. So, this one
Python going to go and assign it for a
string data type. So, if you use double
quotes or even if you go and use single
quotes like this, and you say hi, this
considered to be a string as well. It
doesn't matter whether you are using
double quotes or single quotes. Once
Python sees it, it's going to assign it
for data type string. And you can put
[music] inside it anything. So, you can
use literals like this, or even you can
go and say double quotes and you put
number inside it. This still to be
considered as a string because Python
once sees the double quotes or single
quotes, it will automatically assign it
to a string without going deeper in
order to understand whether they are
numbers or characters or even special
characters. So, all those stuffs
considered to be a string.
Okay, so so far we can have numeric
values, text values. Now, moving on to
the third very famous type. We can say F
is equal to true, or another value, we
say it is equal to false. Okay, so what
do we have here? We have here like
words, true and false, but they are not
between like double quotes or single
quotes. So, they are not string. Those
two are special values for the data type
Boolean. Okay, so that means the Boolean
data type has only two values. It could
be true or false. There is no third
value. It's like you are saying for my
question there is like only yes or no,
one and zero, so true and false. So,
again that means for the other data
types you could have any value that you
want, but for the Boolean it has only
two values. This is a great and very
important data type in order to build a
logic inside our program, and the
Boolean usually is like an output of a
lot of functions. So, if you compare
like two values, if they are equal, we
will get the true. If not, we will get
false. So, this is very important data
type. And now, one more thing, this is
case-sensitive. That means the first
character must be capitalized and the
rest must be lowercase. If you go and
say true like this, it will not work. As
you can see, it has like different color
even. So, it is very important to have
the first letter as capitalized and the
rest as lowercase. Okay, moving on to
the next one, we have something special
and this one called none. So, again,
this is a word, it's not between double
quotes. So, this is not a string. This
is a special value. And now, since we
are saying none, that means it is
nothing. I don't have a value for this
variable yet. It's like saying, "Okay,
I'm going to have now a variable, but I
don't want to assign for it any value. I
don't know yet which one going to be."
Or you say, "For this variable, we will
not assign anything for it." So, none
means nothing. It is special value to
say there is no data, there is no value.
So, that means we don't have a data type
for this. Now, since we are talking
about the none, I would like to explain
something that confuses a lot of
developers. You could have this value
where you say, "I'm going to have like
double quotes, but nothing inside it."
So, there is nothing. This is totally
different than the none. Because in this
scenario where you have double quotes
and nothing inside it, Python understand
already we are talking about a string
value. So, it going to do everything as
any other string. It going to reserve
for it a place in the memory, it going
to treat it as a string and we call this
as a blank. Blank has already a data
type string and we going to treat it in
the code as a string. But, the special
value none, we don't know yet which data
type. So, Python will not do anything
for it, will not go and create anything
in the memory, will not assign it to any
data type. And another one we could have
as well double quotes and inside it a
space. This we call it an empty space.
The same thing like the blank, it is
string, it will has place in the memory.
And even here, we have a value of the
space. So, let's write few comment. This
is Boolean, same thing is here. Now, for
the none, we call it none type. For the
blank, it is string, but it is empty. It
is blank. And the last one, this is as
well a string, and this has empty space.
So, again, what we have learned, we have
numeric values like the int and float.
And for the text, we have a string data
type. Once you open two double quotes or
single quotes, you can write inside it
whatever you want. It could be letters,
it could be numbers. [music] Python
going to treat it all as same data type,
string. Another data type, which is
really cool, where you have only two
values, true and false for the
conditions. And then we have special
case, where you don't want to assign any
value, and we don't know yet the data
type. We call it none, and it is
different than the blank and the empty
space. So, those are the basics of data
types.
Now, you might ask me, what is the big
deal about the data types? Why [music]
do we have to learn them? Well, you have
to understand your tools that you have
in the programming language in order to
work with the data. And you cannot use
all the tools for all values. There are
specific tools for specific data types.
[music] And that's why I need you to
understand now a little bit more about
the functions and data types. So, now
there is like one thing that we are
always doing as we are programming, we
want to do something to the data. So,
this has two parts. Now, we have learned
data are values. And now, in order to do
something to our data, we use functions.
And functions are very simple. You have
a value, you pass it to the function,
the function does something, and then in
the output, you will get a new value.
Now, in Python, there are like three
main types of functions. The first one,
we call it the standalone functions.
They are functions that you can go and
use them directly. Like the function
that we have learned before, print and
type. Those are standalone functions.
They are not complicated, they just
work. Now, to the second type of
functions, we have something called
method of a class. So, methods are as
well functions, but they are a little
bit more complicated where they belong
to something. You can't just go and
directly use them, you have to prepare
something before using the methods. And
for that, we have methods or functions
like the upper to make a string
capitalized, and as well we have another
method called replace to replace
something inside your string. Now, there
are like third thing that you can do to
your values, we call it operations. And
yes, my friend, operations are
functions, but it is something
completely behind the scenes, and you
don't have to worry about those
functions. For now, just learn they are
operations, and that's it. They are very
easy, you just go and use symbols like
plus, divider, greater, we have equal.
All those are operators, they are like
shortcuts in order to use a hidden
function, let's say. Now, of course, the
question is, where do these functions
come from? The first and the very
important one is the standard Python
library. At the start, as we have
installed Python at our PC, we have
actually not only installed the Python
engine, we have installed as well this
standard library. So, this one is a huge
toolbox that comes with Python, full of
very helpful built-in functions that we
use every day in Python. Now, if this is
not enough, we have another source of
functions, we call it the third-party
libraries. They are actually tools that
made by the community. You can install
them in order to extend the power of
Python, and there are very famous
libraries like the Pandas, NumPy,
TensorFlow, and many other amazing
things that can help us with many
different tasks using Python. And now,
we come to the third source of
functions, we have the user-defined
functions. It is something that you code
and create on your own in order to do
something to our values. So, those are
the different types of functions and the
different sources of functions. And now
we can understand one more very
important thing about the standalone
functions and method and what this has
to do with the data types. Okay, so now
we're going to go and put all the pieces
together. Now we start at the top. We
have the standard Python library. So it
is the Python toolbox and if you open
it, you will find many stuff, but we
find something called modules. A module
is like a Python file that contains
reusable code. So you don't have to
write it and program it each time. Now
the most famous one that we have in
Python is the built-in module. So this
built-in module is always there and
ready to be used. So it is always
connected and you don't have to do
anything. That's why you don't see us
importing the built-in module. Now what
is inside this built-in module? We can
find the famous standalone functions
that we already used. We have the input,
the print, type function, links
functions and usually we call them the
built-in functions. Now not only that,
we can find as well classes. Again,
we're going to deep dive into the
classes later, but think about it, it's
like blueprints and we have a class for
each data type in Python. [music] And
now for each class, for each data type,
we have special functions. We call them
methods. And those methods are attached
to only those classes. So for example,
for the string class, we have methods
like upper and replace and there are
many other methods. For the integer, we
have a method like for example two
bytes. And as I said, for each data type
we have a class. Now inside this library
we have as well other modules like for
example the math and this is very
powerful in order to do mathematical
calculations and so on, but this is not
a built-in. It's not already connected.
It is there in the library, but if you
want to use it, you have to go and
import it. Import means I'm installing
this in my code. Now inside this module
we can find as well functions. Like for
example, we have seal and floor and of
course many other stuff. So as you can
see, there is like not one place for all
functions. It's like spreaded into
multiple modules and as well classes. So
now let's have an example. Let's say
that we have the value hello. So now in
Python, this value, this data, it's not
like a value in the air, it is an object
of string. And since now this value is
attached to the class, we can use
without any limitations all the methods
of this class. So without any
limitations, I can go and apply the
method upper or replace to this value.
Now of course the question is, can I use
the other functions? Well, it depends on
the Python rules and whether it makes
sense of course. So for example, from
the built-in functions, I can go and use
the type and the length for this value
without any issues. But now if you try
to use the functions from the math
module, it will not work, it is
restricted cuz of course it makes no
sense to apply mathematical operations
on a string. So about the functions, it
really depends. Some functions will work
and others will not. But what is totally
not allowed is to use the methods of
other class. Like for example, the
method of the integer cuz they are
special functions only for the integer.
So this is actually how it works. Let's
have another example. Let's have the
value 50. Now again, this value 50 is
not like in the air, Python going to go
and connect it as an object to the class
integer. So what this means my friend, I
can go and use any methods inside this
class for my number, for the integer.
And of course about the other functions,
it depends. So for example, for the
built-in functions, I can go and use the
type function, but I cannot go and use
the length function because for Python
[clears throat] it makes no sense. And
on the other hand, in the mathematical
module, we can go and use almost all the
functions because we have an integer, a
number, and we can go and apply
mathematical functions. And now we come
to the point, if you try to use any
methods from the string class, nothing
going to work because no string methods
will be allowed to be used for integers,
only for the string. Okay, so now let's
quickly recap. Your data, your values in
Python, they are objects that is
connected or belong to a specific data
type class and this class has multiple
methods. Now this value can use any
methods inside this class. So that means
those methods are dedicated only for one
data type for this class, but it is
totally forbidden to use the methods of
another data type class. And about the
other functions, it depends. It depends
on the Python rules. Some functions will
work and others will not work because of
course it makes no sense. So my friend,
this is the big picture. This is how
things works in Python and now it's
totally fine if you didn't understand
everything like 100% because as we
progress in the course, I'm going to
explain more and more in details. I'm
sure at the end you're going to be
master in Python. Okay, now we're going
to do quick conversion between the
functions and methods. So the functions
are independent block of code. The
methods are functions. So again, they
are like codes, but they belong to
objects and classes. This is not the
only difference. There are differences
as well in the syntax. So now as we
learn that the syntax going to be very
simple for the functions, we say the
function name and then between
parentheses we put a value or a
variable. For example, we have learned
print hello. So print is the function
name and between parentheses we pass the
value and we have another function
called type. So this is the function
name and we pass for it a value like 50.
So I think nothing new here. But now
with the syntax for the methods looks
different. So this time we start with
the value or the variable name, then we
use dots and after that the method name.
So it's the way around. We start with
the value then the method name. In the
functions we start with the function
name then the value. And the value that
you are manipulating will not be between
the parentheses. We can of course put
some other stuff, but the main value
that you are manipulating, it will be
outside after a dot. So let's have an
example. Our value hello and then dot
and the method name upper. So it looks
different, but it's not that hard. The
same thing here. we have the value 50.
bit_length,
the method name. Of course, we can go
and use variables, not only values. So,
that's the main differences between
functions and methods. Okay, now we can
have few examples. Let's go and create
two variables. One of them is a string
with any value, and another one, a
number, like 10. So, we have a string
and integer. Now, let's try out few
built-in functions in Python. We already
done that many times, so we're going to
go and print the text. And as well,
let's go and print the number. So, let's
go and execute it. And that's means the
print function can work for any data
type. Okay, so now let's go and use
another built-in Python function, and
this time we're going to go and use the
function type. So, for both of them, the
type function is really nice one in
order to understand the data type of
your values, because as we learned,
Python going to automatically detect the
data types, but maybe you are wondering
which data type did the Python detect.
So, now if you go and execute it, you
will not see anything in the output, and
that's because type will not print
anything in the output. That's why we
have to use the print. [music] So, that
means we have to go at the start and say
print, and now we are doing the nesting
function. So, we are using function
inside another function. So, print.
[music]
And now let's go and execute it. And
with the output, we are seeing the
result of the type function. So, from
the first variable, the type is class
string, because it is a string value.
And for the second variable, the number,
it is from the class integer. So, with
that we can understand clearly which
type Python is using for my variables
and my values. So, as you can see, this
function works for any type. Okay, so
now let's keep going, let's move to
another built-in function in Python. We
have the length, l e n. So, let's do it
for both of our variables. This function
is really simple, it's going to go and
calculate the length of your data, the
value. So, now if you go and execute it,
you will find at the start we have the
number two, and this comes from the
first print, Because our value has here
like two characters, the length of this
string is two. So, that's why we are
seeing two. But, for the second print,
we are getting an error. And if you
check the error message, it says, "The
object of type int has no length." So,
that means, my friend, this built-in
function, the length, will not [snorts]
work for the data type integer. So,
again, not all functions will work for
all data types. So, that means we cannot
do that, and we comment that out, and
then execute, we will get two. Okay, so
now we're going to move to the methods
of the data type classes. Let's try, for
example, the method upper, and go and
apply it for both of the functions. So,
let's start with the first one. We're
going to say this time the syntax like
this, text.dots, and then open and close
parentheses like this. So, as you can
see, the syntax is different than
functions. Now, if I go and execute it,
you will see we will not get any error,
but I will not see anything in the
output, and that's because I'm not
printing. So, we're going to put the
whole thing in print. So, now I'm
putting a method inside a function,
yeah? Let's go and execute it. You will
see now the same value, but everything
is written in uppercase. And this is
exactly what the upper methods does. It
converts everything to an uppercase.
Now, let's go and apply the same thing
for the number. So, we're going to say
number.dots, upper. And now you can see
we are not even getting the green color.
Now, if you go and execute it, you will
get here an error, and it says, "The int
object has no attribute upper." As we
learned, the value 10 is an object from
the class integer, and in this class,
there is no method called upper. We can
find this method only in the class of
string. That's why Python is not finding
this method, and we are getting an
error. So, it is not allowed to use the
method of another class. So, now let's
go and apply a method from the integer
class. For example, we're going to use
the bit length, like this. This method
is very simple. It can go and calculate
how many bits are needed in order to
store my value. So, now if I go and
execute it, nothing going to happen, but
of course, we can go and print the
value. So, we're going to say print and
execute it. So, it says we need four
bits in order to store the value 10. So,
as you can see, it is allowed to use
this methods because it is an integer
methods. Now, if you go and apply the
same methods
for the text, it will not work. So, if
you go and execute it, it's going to say
the string object has no attribute bit
length. So, it will not work. You can
use only the methods from the same
class. So, now we have an understanding
about what is allowed and what is
forbidden. So, this is exactly why you
have to understand how things works in
Python between the functions and methods
and the data types.
>> [music]
>> Okay, my friends. So, this is the full
map of Python data types that we are
going to visit each one of them step by
step in this course because it is very
fundamental in Python to understand how
I'm going to store, structure,
manipulate, transform my values and
data, and what are my tools? What are
the functions that I can use in each
data type? So, we can understand them
one by one, and one of the most
important data type here is the string.
So, we're going to cover that first in
our course. Okay, friends. So, now let's
have a quick recap. Each value in Python
has a data type. It tells Python how to
treat and operate on that value, and
Python is smart enough to automatically
detect the data types. So, you don't
have to declare any types for Python,
and data types can change anytime. It is
very dynamic in Python. So, you can
switch the types of variables anytime
you want. And for the data types, we
have three main categories. The no
value, so none type, when you have
nothing. Then the second category, we
have the single values. Those are the
very basic and primitive data types like
integer, float, string, and Boolean. And
then a third category, we have the
multiple values. Those are the advanced
data types. We call them data
structures, containers, collections. And
here we have very important data types
like list, tuple, set, dictionary. and
we have learned values are objects that
belongs to a class, and each data type
class has its own methods. [music] So,
each data type comes with its tools in
Python. So, this is what we mean with
data types.
Now, we have [music] a challenge for
you. Create five variables where you can
enter your age, height, name, are you a
student, and something with no value
yet. Then, print the values, the types,
and the length of each variable. Now,
pause the video and solve the task.
All right, friends. So, now let's have a
look back to our road map. With that, we
have completed the first chapter, the
foundations of Python. So, you learned
some theory, and as well, you know the
basic tools that you're going to end up
using each time you write Python code.
So, that was easy stuff. Now, we're
going to go deeper. We have two chapters
for one idea, how to work with data. And
here we have two very common data types.
We have the text, the string, and we
have the numbers. So, we're going to
start with the first one, how to work
with the strings. This chapter going to
be a big one because, my friend, in
companies, almost all data is text. And
here, I'm going to give you with all
tools in order to work with this type of
data. So, how to transform it, process
it, clean it up, validate it, extract
things, search, analyze it. So, many
tools. And we will do that right now.
And of course, we're going to start with
the first question, what are string
values?
>> everywhere in the file names, in the
user input, in web data, APIs, logs. So,
I can say like 80% of the real-world
data is just text. And usually text has
a really bad data quality. Everything
could happen like typos, extra spaces,
weird characters. So, it is highly
likely to be a messy and noisy. But at
the same time, text informations could
contain a lot of informations. Like we
could have in one string value a name,
age, and country. And it doesn't matter
whether you are a data engineer,
analyst, data scientist, you have always
to manipulate and prepare the data
before doing anything. So, you need to
learn all the tools in order to work
with the string values. And this is
exactly what we're going to do now. So,
let's [music] go.
So, now before we go into details of
each function [music] and operation that
we can do on the strings, I have
prepared you like a road map or let's
say a cheat sheet where I have grouped
the different operations and functions
under specific categories. For example,
if you want to go and search for
something, we have here like three
methods and one operator. And now about
the coloring, the red ones, they are the
built-in functions in Python. And the
blue ones are the method that is
specialized only for the class string.
So, as you can see, we have a lot of
very important methods. And then we have
the yellow ones, they are the operators
that you can use in order to manipulate
the string values. So, this is the road
map and let's start with the first
group. We're going to talk about the
types. So, here we have like two
built-in functions in order to handle
the string data type. So, let's go.
All right. So, let's start. Now, we're
going to go and get any value. So, let's
have a variable and inside it we put a
string value like your first name. And
of course, you can put this in single
quotes or in double quotes. It's all the
same for Python. Now, the first built-in
function that we can use is the type.
You can use it in order to check the
data type of your value. Like for
example, let's go and test it. We say
type and then we use the variable. Then
execute it. You can see we will not get
anything in the because we are not
printing. So in order to see the output,
we have to say print and then execute
again. And now you can see your value
belongs to the class string. And that
means the data type of my value is a
string. So this is really nice in order
to check the data type of your value.
Now let's go and create another
variable, but this time we're going to
go and put a number. Like for example,
24. I'm not 24. Now of course, if you go
and print the data type of the age,
we will get a different value. So let's
go and execute. Now you can see the
class is integer because we have here a
number. So so far everything is good,
but now let's go and do the following
thing. We're going to say print and then
we can say your age is double points.
And now we go and do operation like the
plus. And here at the end we say age. So
now we'd like to see like a nice message
about the age. Now if I go and execute
it, I will get an error. We are trying
to do operation between an integer and a
string value. And this will not work.
It's going to work only if you have like
two integers or two strings. So now we
cannot do it like this. We have to go
and convert the data type. And here
comes the second built-in function. We
have the STR. It's going to turns any
value into a string data type. And this
is exactly what we need in this
scenario. So what we're going to do? We
will go and pass the age to the function
STR and in return we will get a string
value. Then it going to be okay because
we are doing a plus between two string
values. So if you go and execute it,
everything will be working. Your age is
24 and Python will accept it. So this is
exactly what the STR function does.
Converts the data type from any value to
a string. So now there is like something
important to understand. The variable
age contains a number. So here as we
converted the value to a string, that
doesn't mean Python going to go to the
variable and change the data type there.
We just change the data type only in the
print. And here we don't have any new
assignments. So if you go afterward and
print the data type of the age, it will
stay as an integer. And this is of
course okay if you want to go and do
something like this. So, you want to go
and add like 5 years. This will work
because the age is number and as well
five is number. But if you say, you know
what, I would like to change the value
of the age to be always as a string. So,
you have to go like this and say str
age. So, that you are grabbing that 24
as an integer, convert it to a string,
and then assign it again to the age. And
with that, if you go and print the data
type of the age, you will get here a
string. And of course, you cannot later
go do something like this. And if you
execute it, you will get an error
because now age at this point is a
string. So, as you can see, Python is
very dynamic and you can go and change
the data type anytime you want. But you
have to be careful once you change the
data type to, for example, a string,
then you and Python has to handle it as
a string. And you can apply only the
methods of string to this value. So, if
you change the data type, be careful
what you are doing, otherwise you will
get errors like here in my code. Okay.
So, that's all about that two functions
and this category. We're going to move
to the next one. We have here one
built-in function and a methods [music]
in order to do few calculations on the
string. So, it's like we're going to go
and measure something with the string
values. So, let's check those two.
>> [music]
>> Okay. So, now let's have this example.
Let's say that we are asking the user to
give us a password. And the password
going to be something like this, 1 2 3
A. So, now let's say this is the input
of the user. And now as you know, in any
application, if you are adding any
password, there are many rules and one
of them is to check the length of the
password. So, now let's say that in your
application you say, you know what, the
password must be at least eight
characters. So, that means I have to go
and calculate the length of the
password. And to do that, we have the
built-in function len. You can use it in
order to count how many items inside
your value. And in this scenario, we
count how many characters inside our
string value. So, it is very simple.
We're going to go and say len and then
pass to it our variable, our value. And
if you go and execute it, of course,
nothing going to happen because we don't
have a print. So, if you go and say
print and then execute, so the length
function going to return a number and
it's going to be the number of
characters inside your password. And
now, of course, we can go and use this
information to check whether the
password is too short or too long. So,
for example, we're going to learn it, of
course, later, the if statements. We say
if the length of the password
is shorter than eight, double points and
then new line, we say if this is true,
then print your password is too short.
So, let's go and execute it. You can see
our program saying your password is too
short. And now, let's say the user goes
and adds more numbers and characters to
the password and then execute it again.
You will see the length of the password
is 11 and we are not getting any more
this warning. And one more thing, it's
going to go and count everything in the
string. So, if you have like your white
spaces and you execute, it's going to go
and count it. So, now we have like 13.
So, everything going to be counted
whether you have numbers, characters,
special characters, spaces, everything
has a space and it's going to be
counted. So, as you can see, this
function is amazing and there will be a
lot of use cases where we use this
function in our code. So, as you can
see, we can use it in our logic to build
rules in our application to prevent
values that are too short and as well to
prevent values that are too big.
Sometimes you don't want to store like
huge values inside our database or in
our application and we use the length to
check the size of our data. Okay, so now
let's move to the next one. Let's say
that we have the following text and
we're going to have like multiple lines.
That's why I'm going to go and use the
triple quotes. This, of course, still
count as a string. I just want to have
it multiple lines. It's easier to see.
So, let's start with the first one.
We're going to say Python
is easy to learn.
And I think so. Then we say Python is
powerful. And the last sentence we say
many people love Python. So, like this.
Now, what I'm trying to show here that
like we have an article or a long
description of something. And now, we
can do analysis in Python about how many
times a word appears in the text. So now
in order to do that in Python, we have a
special methods for the string values.
It is called count. So it going to
returns how many times specific value
appears in a text in string. So it is
very simple. Let's go and apply that. So
this time we are talking about the
methods and the syntax for that going to
be like this. The value or the variable
dot and then afterward the method name.
So the method name going to be count as
well we need double parentheses. And now
inside the parentheses, we going to pass
the value that Python has to count. So
for example, I'm going to go with the
value Python. We have here Python many
times. If you go and execute it, of
course nothing going to happen because
we are not printing. So you go and put
the whole thing in print and let's go
and execute. So now as you can see in
the output we are getting two. So this
method returns a number how many times
something appears in your string. Now
you might say, but wait a second we have
here two, but if you check the text
Python appears three times. Well, that's
because my friend Python is case
sensitive and if you write it exactly
like me here where the third one
everything is like lower case, then this
considered to be no match. We are
searching for Python, but the first
character is capitalized. So Python is
very sensitive about the upper and lower
case and it will not consider this as a
match. Now for example, if I go over
here and say Python where everything is
lower case, I will have only one match.
This is exactly the last one. So this is
really an amazing method especially if
you are doing text [clears throat]
analysis. It is one of the main thing
that we do there. We count the frequency
of a term or a value. And one more thing
that I usually use it in order to check
whether we have any special or unwanted
characters in my code. So for example, I
don't want to have like the dollar sign
in my code and if I go and execute it, I
will see okay, there is zero. That means
everything is clean in my code. But if
you have somewhere the dollar sign like
here, I can say aha, the code is not
clean. There is somewhere special
character. So this method as well helps
you to check the quality of your codes
and to detect any issues. Okay, so
that's it for this group. We have
learned how to measure our string
values. All right, moving on to the next
one, we have here the transformations.
So, here we have two methods and [music]
four operators that's going to help us
in order to reshape the string value
with our combining, splitting,
extracting stuff from our string values.
So, they are very important and very
useful and we're going to check them one
by one.
Okay, so [music] now let's say that we
have the following value. So, we have
like a date. It starts with the year,
then slash, and after that comes the
month and another slash, and at the end
we have the date. Now, as we know that
we have like different formats on how we
format a date, and let's say that in our
data we don't use like a slash as a
separator between the date parts. We
would like to have like a minus. So,
actually I would like to replace those
slashes with a minus. Now, in order to
do that, we can use the method replace.
So, we can go and use replace. And for
that, you have to specify two things.
Old value, the slash, this is our old
value, and then we're going to go and
replace it with a new value, which is
the minus. So, this is new. So, you have
to specify always those two things for
the replace function. And now, once you
apply this to our value, so it's going
to start searching 2026.
Nothing so far, but here we have a
match. So, here we have a slash and
Python going to go and take it out from
the string and instead of that, it's
going to go and replace it with the
replacement. With a new value. And then
it continues. So, 05 and then here we
have another slash. So, same thing
happen. It going to go and remove the
old value and then put here the new
value. So, as you can see, it is very
simple. All what we are doing is
replacing the old value with a new
value. And this is my friends very
useful. All right, now for the replace
function, there are many real world
scenarios and use cases where we have to
use this function. And I can show you
more than like 20 use cases. And now I'm
going to show you some common issues
that we have in data and how we solve it
using replace. So for example, let's
have a price and it is stored, let's say
in string. In Europe, the decimals are
splitted using comma, not a dot. So we
have this number and of course we cannot
work with this number. We have to go and
format it differently. So we have to
bring it to standards. So that means we
have to replace the comma with a dot. So
we're going to do it like this. price.
replace. And now we have to define two
things. The old value, which is the
comma, and then new value, which is the
decimal dots. So let's go and execute
it. Now of course we will not get
anything in the output. As usual, we
have to print and let's go and execute
it. Now as you can see we have a dot
instead of comma. And of course this
still as a string and we can go and
format it as a float later. So as you
can see we use the replace in order to
bring standards to our values. Now let's
have another very famous issue. Let's
say that we have phone numbers and phone
numbers are usually catastrophic. They
are just many different styling and
formats on how to write a phone number.
Let's go with this one, like this. Now
as you can see here we have different
sections of the phone number and things
are separated with a minus. Now let's
say that this is not the format that you
work in our application. We would like
to format things using slash. So that
means you have to replace the minus with
a slash. And in order to do that, we use
our replace function. So the old value
going to be the minus and the new value
going to be the slash. And of course the
whole thing we have to do it in a print.
So let's go and execute it. Now as you
can see our phone number is splitted
using slashes and with that again we are
formatting our value differently using
the replace. Now there is like another
use case for the replace. We don't have
always to replace a value with a new
value. We can replace the old value with
nothing. Like for example, let's say
that I don't want to see any special
characters between the numbers. I would
like to have really clean float number,
just numbers, no special characters, no
characters, and we can do that. So, that
means we have to go and replace the
minus with nothing. And this is exactly
what we can do with the replace. We can
go and say as a new value nothing. As
you can see, it is blank, it is empty.
And now, if you go and execute it, you
can see in the output Python replaced
all those minuses with nothing, and now
you have only numbers. Of course, you
can go and add a space here again, but
space considered to be a character. So,
again, you have like special characters
in between. But, if you don't specify
anything, it's like we are removing a
character. So, it's not anymore replace,
it's like remove. So, this is a trick.
If you want to remove something from
your values, go and use replace, and the
new value should be just nothing. So,
let's have another example. Let's go
back to the price, and now let's have
the following number. So, we're going to
have a dollar sign at the start, then
1,299.99.
So, now we could have such a price, and
now I would like to convert the whole
thing to a real float number. So, we
have to get rid of all those decorations
that we have inside the price. And of
course, we can do that using the
replace. So, now let's do it step by
step. We want to get rid of that dollar
sign. So, the old value going to be the
dollar sign, and what we're going to
replace it with nothing. So, we are
removing the dollar sign. No new values
is needed. And of course, let's go and
print it. So, let's go and execute. Now,
as you can see, we don't have the dollar
sign, but still we have an issue. We
don't need as well a comma. This is as
well just a format that is not needed
for a float number. Now, in order to do
another replace, what we're going to do,
we will add another method just at the
end. So, after the end of the first
replace, we're going to do another dot.
And again, we're going to use the same
method replace. So, what we are
replacing now, we are replacing the
comma as well with nothing. So, how this
can be executed? First, Python going to
go and get the value in the price, then
apply the first replace by removing the
dollar sign, and then the whole result
going to be as well applied to the next
methods where it's going to go I remove
the comma from the string. So now let's
go and execute it. So with that as you
can see we don't have any decorations,
the dollar sign is away and as well the
comma. And this is what usually happens
in projects. We have a lot of issues in
one value and we keep adding replace
after replace until we cover all the
scenarios.
Okay friends, now time to challenge your
new skills. I want you to convert this
messy phone number into a clean number
with only digits. So no need for all
those characters like plus, spaces,
parentheses, and the minus.
And now we're going to learn [music] how
to join text, how to concatenate two
strings in one string using the plus
operator. So now let's have a very
simple example where we have the first
name, let's say Michael, and the last
name
Scott.
And now I would like to have like
everything in one value, in one string
value. In order to do that we can simply
use the plus operator. So now in order
to do that we're going to say last name
is equal to the first value plus the
second value. So as you can see it is
very simple, we don't have to use any
function or whatever. We just use this
nice plus. Now we go and let's say print
it the last name and let's go and
execute it. Now as you can see
everything in one value, Michael and
Scott, and with that we have concatenate
two values or let's say joined two text.
of course you might say, "Well, let's
have something in between the first name
and the last name. It doesn't really
look good." So that means we have to go
and add in between like space. Space is
like a string value, something like
this, and then we add space in between.
So that means I'm joining the first name
together with the space. And now we have
to join the space with the last name. So
we have to go as well use another plus.
Now we are like connecting three values,
first name, the space and the last name.
Let's go and try it out. Now as you can
see we have here nice space in between
and if we say, you know what, let's have
a minus instead, you can have that. So
as you can see this is very simple, this
is how we join multiple values together
using the very simple plus operator. Now
I'm going to show you very common
example that we use in our project for
the plus operator. So let's say that we
have a folder and we have here any path.
So see users bar and we have like a file
name, let's say it is the report.csv.
So now usually in projects we create
different variables and so on and
usually we split the folder path from
the file path so that everything stays
dynamic and I can go in one place and
change the folder path. Now of course if
I want to go and open any file using
Python, I have to go and combine both of
the folder and the file to have the full
path. And of course we can do this very
easily using the plus operator. So we
can say full file path
and we just go and concatenate the
folder with the file. Now let just go
and print it.
Full file path. Let's go and execute and
with that we have the full path but we
have here an issue, we are missing here
a final slash. Well either you correct
your folder path like this or you can go
and add it in between the folder and the
file but let's go and do it on the
folder and execute and with that we have
a full path of our file. So this is how
we use the plus operators in real
projects. [music]
Okay, so now let's talk [music] about
the F-string in Python. So the F-strings
are modern super easy way to format and
build strings in Python and the F stands
for formatted. So basically the F-string
can help us to put variables,
expressions directly inside your string
without have to worry about the data
types in very easy and friendly way.
Okay, so now let's go and create few
variables like your name, so Sam. Let's
go with the age, for example, 34. And
now let's go and create a Boolean value
like is students. Let's say false. Now,
if you want to go and put everything in
one string value in order maybe to print
a message, we have learned so far to do
it like this. So, print and then we
start with a string, for example, my
name is and then the value comes from
name. So, we have to go and add plus and
then the variable name, then another
plus in order to concatenate the values.
And now we can go and add another
message like I am, then we go and enter
the age, then another plus and then the
variable age, then another plus, and
then we continue with the message years
old. And then we say and
student status is space, and then we go
and get our last variable is students.
And maybe I would like to have at the
end a dot. So, another plus. Let's go
and test this first. Uh, of course, we
cannot do that. We have to go and change
the data types, right?
Of course, we cannot go and concatenate
numbers and a Boolean with a string. We
have everywhere to go and change the
type to string. So, we're going to go
and use the function str to cast our
values. Let's go and try again. All
right, now it is working. My name is
Sam. I am 34 years old and student
status is false. So, this is how we
learned to do it so far and you can feel
the struggle, right? We have always to
go and add plus, we have to take care of
the data types, and it feels really
frustrating, right? Now, we will never
do that again. We have new modern way in
Python on how we construct a string
value if we have multiple variables like
this. So, let me show you how we're
going to do it easier and more
professional. So, we're going to go and
say print and we're going to have our
double quotes or single quotes. And now
exactly before the first quotes, we go
and add the letter F. So, now with that,
Python understands, "Aha, now we have to
go and format everything as a string."
So, now how we going to do it? We going
to say, "My name is" and now after that,
we need the value from the variable
name. Previously, you have used the plus
operator in order to join or concatenate
the text. Now, with the F-string, we
don't have to go outside of the double
quotes. We going to stay inside the
double quotes. We don't need the plus
operator. All what we need is the curly
brackets or braces, whatever, and we put
inside it the variable name. So, without
having any plus or without exiting the
double quotes. And now we continue like
normal, "I am" Now, here about the age,
in the previous way we have used, of
course, the plus in order to concatenate
and as well we have converted the data
type. We don't need to do anything
anymore. All what you have to do is to
use the curly brackets and just put the
variable name inside it. Python going to
deal with the rest, so Python going to
go and convert the age to a string and
as well concatenate it with the rest of
the text. So, as you can see, this is
very simple. And after that, we continue
with our text, "so years old and student
status is" And now we come to the same
scenario, we have a variable where it
contains a Boolean data type.
Previously, we have to apply the
function STR and plus operator. We don't
need anything anymore. All what you have
to do is to open and close curly
brackets and just put inside it the
variable name. And of course, at the
end, we need the dots. So, let's go and
execute it. And with that, as you can
see, we are getting exactly the same
results. Okay, so now if you go and
compare the old way with the new way,
you can see the new way is shorter. It
is easier to read. As you can see, "My
name is name. I am age years old" and so
on. Nothing is disconnected using the
plus operator or using the string
function. So, it is short, readable,
super cool, and looks like exactly what
you want to see. So, now as we go on on
the course, we will not use any more the
plus operator and converting data types
if you want to build a string value.
From now on we're going to use the
modern way on how we construct string
value, especially if we have multiple
variables included. And now about the F
formats, we can use as well expressions
inside our string. So for example, let's
go and print this one. And of course we
use the F letter before. So we say 2 + 3
equal. Now what we can do, we open and
close curly brackets and we can go and
add an expression like 2 + 3. And now if
you go and execute it, you can get 2 + 3
is equal to 5. So not only variables,
you can go and add expressions inside
those two curly brackets. And now of
course I know some of you going to say,
wait a second, those curly brackets I
really like them and I want to print
them in the output. So how we going to
do that if we are using it for variables
and expressions? So for example, let's
say we have a string value and we are
formatting it with the F string. And
then you say I like this brackets and
inside them there is something. This is
me. So now if I go and execute it, of
course I'm going to get an error because
this is not variable, this is not an
expression. So that means we have
somehow to tell Python to print the
curly brackets and we are not using them
for variables. So that means if you want
to show the curly brackets as a part of
your text, you have to go and escape
them by adding double brackets like
this. So that means at the start we're
going to have two and as well at the
end. So let's go and try that out. With
that you got your nice curly brackets in
the output. So if you want them in the
output, just go and use them twice. Okay
my friends, so that's all about the
modern and super easy F string.
Okay, so now let's move to the next one.
[music] It's going to be exactly the
opposite. We're going to go and split
our string into multiple string values.
So we have here method called split. It
going to break a string value into
smaller pieces. So let's understand how
this works. Okay, so now let's say that
we have the following value. So, we have
like a first name and then minus. After
that, let's say that we have the age and
then minus and at the end we have like
the country, USA. Now, of course, the
whole thing is one value. So, the whole
thing is one string value. But, we have
the feeling that we have here inside it
like three informations, right? We have
the first name, we have as well the age
and as well the country. And this
happens a lot in real world where in
some databases they're going to put many
informations in one value, in one
string. Now, of course, as we are doing
analytics, we would like to have those
informations splitted. Each one of them
is really important and I would like to
have like different operations in each
value. So, that's why I would like to
split this one value into three values.
Now, in order to do that in Python, it
is very simple. We're going to use the
method split. So, we have to tell Python
what is the separator. And as you can
see from example, it is those minuses
between the values. So, we go and pass
this value inside the method. Oh, this
looks like a face now. Now, if you go
and apply this, what going to happen?
Python in the output going to return
multiple string values. And for that, we
can have like a special data type called
list. Don't worry about it, we're going
to cover everything in that data
structure. So, the output going to be a
list of multiple string values. So, now
we can start with the first value and
put it in the output. So, this is the
first string value. So, we going to have
the first name like this. And in the
list, we separate the multiple values
using a comma. Then, Python going to see
the separator and take the value after
it. And as well, the same thing, put it
in the output. So, we going to get the
age 24. So, this is our second value and
then a comma. Again, Python sees here a
separator and then get the third value
and put it in the output. So, we will
get the third value, the country, as
well in the list. And with that, my
friends, we have splitted this one value
into three string values. So, those are
three separated string values.
And if you look to this, you can see
there There something disappeared in the
output and that is the separators. We
don't have those values in the outputs.
[music] So, if you specify the separator
in the split, it will not be, of course,
included in the final outputs. So, this
is really nice. This is exactly how the
split function works in Python. All
right. Now, let me show you this issue
that we have usually. We have a stamp,
and let's say that inside it we have a
date together with the time. So, let's
say we have the year 2026, and after
that we have space, and then the hour,
something like this. Now, as you can see
in this string, we have two
informations. We have the date and time.
Now, what we can do, we can go and split
those two informations into two
different strings. And in order to do
that, we can use the methods split, and
then we have to specify the separator.
So, now the separator between the date
and time is actually a space. So, we're
going to go and give Python the
separator as one space. And now, of
course, in order to see the results, we
have to go and print it.
And let's go and execute it. So, now as
you can see in the output, we get a list
with two values. The first one is the
date, and the second one is the time.
And this is exactly what we need. Now,
let's have the same example, but this
time we don't have the time. And this
time I would like to have each part of
our date into one separate value. So, I
would like to have the year separated
from the month and the day. Of course,
the question is how they are separated.
Well, using a minus between them. And we
can do the same thing. And now we say
the separator is the minus. And if you
go and execute it, you will get in the
output three values, year, month, and
day. So, as you can see in string
values, we have a lot of informations,
and we can use the split in order to get
each information in separate value. All
right. Now, let's go to another example.
Let's say that we have CSV file, and as
you know, we have the values always
separated with a comma, or maybe a
semicolon, or whatever. So, we could
have like something like an ID, then
like a first name, and then a country,
and maybe afterward like we have a birth
date, something like this. And maybe as
well the gender information. So, now if
you worked before in CSV files, you will
find all those information together in
one row, and all those information are
splitted with the comma. Now, of course,
what you can do, you can go and split
this string into multiple strings using
our split function. So, CSV file splits,
and then the separator here is a comma,
right? And as usual, we have a print,
and let's go and execute it. Now, as you
can see, each column is separated with a
value. So, we have the ID, the first
name, the country, the birth date, and
the last one, the gender. As we are
handling and working with CSV files,
this is as well very nice use case for
the split in order to separate the
values maybe in CSV files. Of course,
there are many other methods on how to
do that. [music] This is just an
example.
Okay, moving on to the next one, we have
another operator, the multiplier. Well,
this one is crazy a little bit.
And you can use it in order to repeat a
specific value multiple times. So, what
you can do actually, for example, let's
take this value "ha", and then multiply
it, let's say, three times. Now, you
might say, "Okay, I'm multiplying a
string value with a number." Well,
that's fine. It's not like the plus
operator, this is allowed in Python. And
let me show you what can happen if you
print this. Let's execute. You will get
"hahaha".
>> [laughter]
>> So, if you find yourself you are
repeating the same value like multiple
times, you don't have to do it. Just
decide on how many times you want to
repeat it. Like, for example, maybe you
find sometimes we do something like this
in the logs, where we say a special
character like the equal, and then we do
it like multiple times to have a nice
separation in the output. So, now if you
go and execute it, you can have like
nice separations. It's easier to read if
you have like huge logs in the output,
and you can organize stuff using this
kind of separations. Now, of course, if
you have a very long code, and you are
adding those separations every time, you
might do something like this, like miss
few equals, and things will not look
nice. So now in order to control how
many like equals you are putting the
output in the logs, you can use one
equal and then multiply it maybe 30
times. [music] So now I'm going to do it
over here and as well here and execute
and with that you're going to have nice
separation in the logs and it is really
quickly if you want to go and change
your mind to say, "Uh let's go and have
hash instead of equal." And execute. Now
you can style your output very easily
only once here, you don't have to repeat
it like 30 times. So this is what
happens if you multiply your string
value with a number or what you're doing
is repeating these values multiple
times. Well, this is the only use case
that I can think of now. Okay, so with
that we have learned two methods and two
operators and now next we're going to
learn about something special, how to
extract specific part of our string.
This can be very interesting. So let's
go.
Now let's take this example. So we have
a simple hello.
Now we usually think about this as like
one value, one string value.
But behind the scenes Python think about
this as a sequence of characters. So we
have like a list of characters and
[music] this will be very important to
understand that each character has a
position and we call it an index. So
it's like we have an address for each
character and we have two types of
indexes. We have the positive indexes
and the negative indexes. So let me show
you what I mean with that. Now about the
positive indexes, we start from left to
right. So we start with the first
character, the H. This has the position
of zero and not one. This confuses a lot
of people. The second character is one,
then two and three, four. And now we
come to something very confusing, the
negative indexing. We start from the
right to the left. So the first
character this time going to be the O
and my friend the first character will
not be zero, it will start with the
minus one. The second one going to be
minus two, the L three and until the
last character going to be the H-5. So,
as you can see the negative indexing
start with the minus one and ends with
minus five where the positive starts
with zero and ends with four. And those
are the indexes that are assigned for
each character in this example. Now, of
course you might say, "Okay, why should
I care about this?" Let's say that I
would like to extract only the first
character. And in order to do that, we
open and close brackets. And now inside
it we specify the position number. And
if you do that, what going to happen?
Python going to go and extract exactly
one character at the position number
zero. So, you will get an H. And you can
do the same task but using the negative
numbers. As well the same thing, open
brackets, put inside it the negative
position, and Python going to find the
position of course here, and you will
get the same value and return. So, you
will get as well here an H. Now, let's
say that I would like to go and extract
another character, for example the O.
Same thing, you have to go and open a
brackets and then choose whether you use
the positive or the negative. So, if you
want to use the positive, you can go and
use four. And with that, Python going to
go and check the position number four,
extract the character for you, and in
the output you will get an O. Of course,
same thing going to happen if you use
the minus one. Python going to find it
over here and will return as well the
same character back. So, you will get an
O for the minus one. Now, let's go crazy
and pick something in the middle. The
same game, you go and use the brackets,
put the position number of your
character, and extract it for you. And
with that, you will get the first L. Or
of course, we can go and use the
negative index and same thing going to
happen. You will get the same character.
So, with that my friend, you can go and
extract whatever you want by just
specifying the index or the position of
your character. And you can use either
positive or negative values. Now, let's
take things to the next level where I
don't want to extract only one character
from my string. I would like to go and
extract like a group of characters. And
now in order to do that, we have to
specify for Python two informations.
First, the starting index and as well
the end index. We have to tell Python
when to stop. So, we have to provide
those two informations, and the syntax
going to be very simple. So, brackets,
start, [music] then double points, and
then an end.
Now, there is something very tricky to
understand. The starting position going
to be included in the output, but my
friend, the end position
will not be included. So, not included.
So, let's have example to understand it.
So, we open bracket. What is the
starting position? It's going to be the
zero, right? And then double points. And
now, since the end position is not
included, we cannot go and say the end
is two. We have to say the end is three.
So, we have to go and specify three for
that. So, now, if you go and execute it,
Python going to do the following. It's
going to say, "Okay, this is the
starting position." And I'm going to
say, "Okay, we start from here." And
then it's going to say, "Okay, the end
position going to be three. So, this is
the end." And then Python going to make
like a wall just before it. And now,
it's going to go and extract everything
between those two boundaries. So, that's
what you will get. Hell, well, with only
ONE L.
>> NO! GOD, [screaming] PLEASE, NO! NO!
>> SO, THIS is what I mean that the end is
not included. So, that means we will not
get the character of the end position in
the output. Now, let's see how this
works if you want to use the negative
numbers. Two brackets, as usual. Now, we
have to specify the starting position.
So, we're going to say here minus five,
double points. And think about it, this
is the first boundary. And now, the same
thing, we're going to stop over here at
the second L. We need only the first
three characters. And since we are
stopping at the minus two, you go and
specify the end as minus two. And my
friend, the same thing going to happen,
you will extract everything in between.
So, you will get in the output as well,
hell, with one L. So, now, of course,
the positive numbers are easier, but
always you have to think of the first
position is zero, and the end index is
always not included in the range. So,
this is how you can extract multiple
characters from a string. All right,
now, there is like another trick with
the start and end, where we say I would
like to go and extract starting from
specific position, and then I would like
Python to include everything as well
after this character. So, I don't want
Python to stop at specific position. I
would like to get everything. So, that
means my friends, I don't have to
specify an end at all. So, that means I
would like to get these parts, and in
order to do it, it's very simple. We
say, "Okay, start from the position
number one, then double points, [music]
and after that, don't say anything.
Leave it empty." So, with that, Python
going to start from the first position,
and then get everything afterwards. So,
this is really nice. We are saying,
"Start here, and go to the end of the
string." And with that, we are skipping
the first character. Now, be careful
with one thing. If you go and say only
one without double points, do you
remember what can happen? Python going
to go and extract only one character.
You will get only an E. But, if you go
and use the double points, you are
saying, "Start with the E, and go and
get me everything until the end of the
string." Now, we go to the last phase,
and this can be the most complicated
one. But, I think once you understand
it, it's going to be easy. So, what we
can do? We can specify the start
position, double points, and then the
end position. And now, we can go and put
another double points. So, now, what is
going on? What is step? This is, of
course, an optional one. If you specify
here a number, you're going to tell
Python how many characters to skip as it
works through the string. Okay, let's
take one example. So, we start at the
position zero. So, we start from here,
and we build the first boundary. And
then, let's say the end going to be
four. So, this is the end position. And
with that, we have specified the second
boundary. So, if you leave it like this,
you will get the first four characters,
of course. Now, if you say, "Let's have
the step as two." So, now, with that, we
are telling Python to skip every second
character. Let's see exactly how this
going to work. So, we're going to go and
focus on all the characters inside the
boundaries, inside this range, and
Python can start with the first
character, so the H. So, this is the
first character, and it will be included
in the output. So, H going to see it
here. So, now, moving on to the second
character, the E. Since we are saying
step two, it will be not included. So,
we will not include every character. We
can include every second character. So,
E will not be included. And now moving
on to the third character, the L. The L
going to be included. And now moving on
to the second L, it will not be
included. Since we have bigger steps, we
have two steps. So, it will be skipped
and not included in the output. So, with
that as you can see, we are skipping
characters using the step. Now, of
course, if you want to get all the
values, you can go and specify here one.
So, Python will not skip anything, will
include all the four characters. And
this is by the way the default. So, if
you don't specify anything, Python is
actually having a step one. So, this is
how the step work. It is not that hard.
Now, if I look to this, I don't really
use a lot the steps. Usually, we only
use the start and end to extract
substrings. All right. Now, let's
practice in Python directly. Let's have
uh this word Python. Now, let's say that
I would like to extract the first
character. In order to do that, we going
to apply the index. So, we open and
close brackets. And now we have to use
either the positive or the negative. So,
I'm going to go with the positive one.
And actually, that's it. The syntax is
very simple. And then we print it like
this. And now let's go and execute it.
So, as you can see, we are getting the
P. And of course, if you want to go and
use the negative number, you have to
count. So, we start from the right side,
minus one, minus two, three, four, five,
six. So, minus six like this. Now, if
you go and execute it, you will get the
same results. Okay, let's move on to the
next one. Let's extract the last
character. So, print text. The same
thing. Now, we have to choose a positive
number. So, the last character is the N.
So, you have to count. So, 0 1 2 3 4 5.
So, the positive number is five. Let's
go and execute it. So, let's go and
execute it. With that, we are getting
the last character, the N. Now, what is
the negative number to get the N? It is
the first one. And the first one is
minus one. So, let's go and execute it.
The same results. Now, let me just put
it like this.
So, here it was a zero.
It was the five. Now, let's go and
extract, let's say the H. So, extract H.
Now, the positive number, we start from
zero and let's test that. We have an H.
And the same thing, if you want a
negative number for that, we start from
the right side, minus one, two, three.
So, as you can see, it is very simple.
We call this technique as indexing, only
one character from a string. And if you
want to get multiple characters, part of
the substring, we call this technique as
slicing. All right. Now, let's have an
example about the slicing. Let's say
that we have a date and we have the
year, the month, and the day. So, here
again, we have multiple informations in
one string and I'm interested only on
part of this string. So, let's say I'm
interested only on the year. So, now we
have to go and extract only the year
from this string. So, let's go and do
that. So, extract
the year. So, we're going to use our
variable date.
And then open and close brackets. This
time, we're going to do slicing and you
have to specify the start and the end.
So, what is the starting point? It is
the first character. So, we start from
the two. That means the starting point
is zero. Then double points. Now, we
have to specify the end and don't forget
the end is not included. So, zero, one,
two, three, four. Four is the minus and
minus is not included. That's why we're
going to specify it as an end like this.
So, let's go and print it as usual and
execute it. So, as you can see, with
that, we got the first part, the year.
It is simple, right? It's not that hard.
Now, there is like another way on how to
do the slicing for this. Since we are
starting at the position zero, we can go
and only specify the end. So, there is
no need to say zero, like double points.
We can just leave the start as an empty
and as a default, it's going to be the
starting point zero and only specify the
end. So, with that, I'm saying the end
going to be the minus here and get me
everything before it. It is just a lazy
way and you will get the same results.
So, let's go and print it and you will
see we'll get the same value. So, if you
find yourself starting always from the
zero, you can go and skip it. Okay, so
now let's move to the next one. We want
to extract, guess what? The month. So,
of course, guys, what I recommend you is
that if I'm giving the task like this,
you don't have to sit and watch and just
see their solution. So, just pause it,
think about the numbers, and check
whether I have the same solution. Now,
how we're going to do this? We're going
to have as well date. Now, what is the
starting point of the month? Let's go
and count. So, 0 1 2 3 4 and 5. So, the
first digit from the month going to be
at the position number five. And then we
have to specify the end. It's only two
characters. So, 5 6 7. The seven is not
included. That's why it is the end here
and we can go and print it. So, let's go
and check that and with that we are
getting the month. Of course, you can go
and use the negative numbers and there
is no shortcut in order to get the
month. Now, let's go to the last one,
extract the day. Let's check the
numbers. Now, what we said, at the zero
we were at five, so 6 7 8. So, we start
at 8 and then after that double point.
And now we don't have to specify the
end. We want to get everything
afterwards, so we don't have to specify
the end. We just leave it like this and
let's go and execute it. So, with that
we are getting the day. So, now of
course, the question is when do we use
positive and negative numbers? Well,
this is my recommendation. If you're
extracting the parts on the left side at
the beginning of the string, it is easy
to use the positive numbers because you
just start counting from the left side.
So, you will have something easy like
this, 4 0. You don't have to count a lot
of stuff until you reach the starting
position. But now, if you want to
extract something at the end, at the
right side, easier to use the negative
numbers because we start counting the
negative numbers from the right side,
from the end of the string. So, that
means for the year, I'm going to go and
stick with the positive numbers cuz it
is on the left side on the start. But
for the day, I will use the negative
numbers because as you can see here we
have eight, we have counted a lot of
things until we reach the day, but it is
way easier if you go and use the
negative numbers. So for example, what
is the starting position? It is minus
one and then minus two. That's it. So
all what you have to do here is to say
minus two. I don't have to go and count
like eight characters. And what is the
end is again like the rest. We don't
have to specify anything. So if you go
and print this, you will get the exact
same results. So if you want to extract
something from the left side, use the
positive numbers. If you want to extract
something from the end, use the negative
numbers. It's way easier. And now you
might ask, "Okay, what about the
middle?" Well, depends. If the middle is
close to the left side, I would go with
the positive, but if the middle is like
closer to the right side, I'm going to
go with the negative numbers. So that's
it. This is about the indexing and
slicing. All right, friends. So with
that we have covered everything about
the transformations that we have in
order to reshape our string value. Now
we come to the most important group. We
can learn how to clean our string
values. So previously as I said, string
values are text and text usually in real
world has bad data quality and we spend
most of our time like cleaning up the
data before doing anything. And those
are your tools in order to clean up the
string values. And I have splitted this
group into two subgroups. The first
subgroup is all about how to clean up
the white spaces. This is very commonly
thing that you have like evil tricky
spaces in your text and you're going to
learn how to clean that up. And in the
second subgroup, we're going to learn
how to clean the cases. So let's start
with the first subgroup, how to clean
the white spaces. [music]
So let's go.
All right. So now let's say that we have
a normal value like max. This is totally
fine. We don't have any white spaces
from left or from right. We have on the
left side entered a white space.
So now of course this white space is
really bad and we would like to get rid
of it. And since it is on the left side,
we can use the method left strip. So,
now what going to happen, Python going
to go and trim this white space from the
left side and remove it completely. You
have again the original value without
any spaces from the left side. Now,
let's say that we have the scenario on
the right side where we have here white
space. So, this time we have it from the
right side.
And of course, this is really a bad
thing we don't need usually like spaces
at the end of any value. Now, to fix it
we have the opposite function right
strip. And if you apply it, the same
thing going to happen. Python going to
go from the right side and remove any
white spaces from the right side. And
with that you will get again your
original value without any spaces from
the right side. Okay, now we going to
come to the scenario where we have from
the left side and as well from the right
side white spaces.
So, of course, you can go and apply both
of the methods on this value, but we
have another method called strip. So,
without left or right, without
specifying left and right. And if you
apply to this value, it going to do
exactly both of the job. So, that means
Python going to go and clean the spaces
from the left side and as well from the
right side. And with that you will get
again your clean value without any
spaces from the left or from the right.
So, my friends, if you want to remove
the white spaces only from the left
side, use the Lstrip. If you want to
remove only from the right side, use the
Rstrip. If you want to remove both of
the sides, then use the strip. So, this
is very simple and nice. All right. Now,
let's go and practice. We can have this
example where the user going to go and
enter a value like engineering. We don't
have any unwanted spaces at the start
and at the end. So, we don't have to do
anything. But now, let's say that our
user did at the start by mistake hit an
enter and then the value engineering.
So, now with that we have data quality
issue. We have unwanted spaces and this
can cause a lot of problems later. So,
we have to go and clean this up. So,
what we going to do, since it is on the
left side, we can go and use the method
left strip.
And with that, we are removing this
white space from the left side. Of
course, we can go and print the value to
check the final results. So, let's go
and do that. As you can see, we have now
engineering and at the start we don't
have any white space. Now, let's have
another example where the user going to
say, "Now, let's move on." And let's say
that now this time our user going to go
and enter engineering, but at the end by
mistake type space. And in order to
solve it, since it is on the right side,
we can go and use right strip. So, this
time we are removing unwanted spaces
from the right side. If you go and print
it, so let's go and do that. You will
see as well, we don't have any spaces
from the right side. All right. Now, we
going to move to the last scenario. I
think you already got it. At the start
by mistake we have a white space and as
well at the end like this. So, we have
unwanted spaces from left and from
right. In this scenario, we can go and
use the strip in order to remove
everything from left and right. Now, if
you go and print it,
you will get the same results,
engineering without any spaces from left
or right. And with that, we improve the
data quality. And now, of course, here
the best practices, if you are getting
any value from your users using the
input function, you cannot expect
whether the space going to be at the
start or at the end. That's why always
go with the strip function just to make
sure you are cleaning all the white
spaces from the left and right. Of
course, this method is going to go and
remove multiple spaces. So, let's go and
add few spaces here. So, we have here
like five spaces before the engineering.
If you go and execute it, you will see
it's still going to go and remove all
the white spaces from the left side.
Now, one more thing, let's say that we
have this value,
data engineering. So, now as you can
see, the space now in the middle, in
between. It's not on the left, not on
the right. If you go and apply the
method strip
and then print
text. So, let's go and highlight it and
execute. You will see in the output we
still have the white space. So, this is
very important. The strip method will
not remove the white spaces inside your
text in the middle. It's only going to
remove the spaces from the left and the
right. And of course, we have other
method in order to remove the space in
the middle. And by the way, those
methods will not only remove the white
spaces, it could remove anything else
you want. So, for example, let's have
this text hash hash hash and then A B C
and then three hashes. Now, we don't
have any white spaces. You would like to
go and remove those special characters
at the start and at the end. We still
can use the strip function in order to
do that. So, we're going to go and use
again the strip, but this time we're
going to pass a value for this methods.
And this is the special character that
we want to remove. So, that means if you
don't specify anything inside the
methods between those two parentheses,
going to be always the white space. But
if you specify special character or any
character here, then Python going to go
and remove those characters from our
string value. So, if you go and print it
that text and execute, now you can see
the output. Our string value don't have
at the start or at the end any hash
value. Okay, so now I'm going to show
you something that I do a lot in my
projects. Now, let's have this value
like engineering. Sometimes we have a
lot of values and it's going to be
really hard to understand whether we
have a white space or not. I'm checking
just the quality of my data. Now, it's
going to be really hard by just looking
to data to see uh is there any space
here or not. We can go and test that
using the following methods. So, what I
usually do with that, I go and print the
length of my data. So, if I go and
execute it, I can see okay, there is
like 12 characters. I will not go and
count now anything. Don't worry about
it. It will not be possible if you have
like huge data. But now instead what we
can do, we can say okay, print the
length of the same value. So, text, but
this time after applying the strip
methods. Now, if you go and execute it,
and now by looking to this you can say
uh we have one white space. Of course,
if I go and add like here two white
spaces and execute it, I can immediately
calculate it uh 13 11. That means I have
two white spaces. So, this is really
amazing technique in order to check how
many white spaces, how many problems do
you have inside your data. Now you can
do very nice stuff like this. We say the
length of the original data minus the
length of my data but after cleaning it
up. So let's go and execute it. Now you
can see in the output we have two. That
means we have two white spaces or you
can do something like this where you say
equal equal and then execute it, you
will get false. So that means that text
is not equal to the same text but after
cleaning it up. Now if everything is
correct, you should get here zero and
you should get here true. Of course we
can make this a little bit nicer where
we say number of spaces equal
and then we put this formula here.
Another one we say is clean
and we put the second formula over here.
Now we go and print something nice.
Number of spaces, comma
number of spaces and here is my data
clean and as well here
the second variable. So let's go and
execute it. Now you can see very nicely
number of spaces is two and is my data
clean? Well, no. So this is the trick.
This is how I usually check the quality
of my data. So if I go and remove now
all the unwanted spaces and execute, you
can see the number of spaces is zero and
is my data clean? Well, true. So as you
can see this is amazing, right? We are
combining now the power of the built-in
functions
>> Avengers
>> like the length together with the method
of string the strip in order to quickly
check the quality of your data the
string values without you having to look
if there are any spaces left or right.
So no need to do that as we have now a
really nice automated program to check
my data for me. Okay, so that's all for
this group. We're going to go now to the
second group. We're going to learn how
to clean the cases of our string values.
So [music] let's go.
Okay, so [music] now let's have the
following example where we're going to
say the user went and entered this value
like this, Python, so everything in
lowercase. And afterward we have
programming where the user entered
everything in uppercase. So now of
course this doesn't look really nice and
sometimes we have rules in our project
where we say everything should be in
lowercase or uppercase. Now let's say
that I would like to go and convert this
value to a lowercase. In order to do
that we can go and use the method lower.
It's going to go and convert everything
to a lowercase. So let's go and try that
out. So we're going to say text. the
method lower and now let's go and
execute it. You can see Python
programming and now programming is in
lowercase. And the first value Python it
is anyway lowercase so nothing going to
happen. Now let's say that in our
project we would like to see everything
in uppercase then you go and use the
opposite where you're going to say text.
and then the method upper. It's going to
go and convert everything to an
uppercase. So let's go and execute it.
Now this time we're going to see the
opposite. Python now is an uppercase.
Initially it was lowercase so it is
converted to uppercase. For the
programming nothing happens because it
is already an uppercase. So as you can
see those two functions going to bring
like standards to your data. You are
like cleaning up the data, right? Now
there are like many use cases for those
two functions but the one that is very
famous is we use them in order to clean
up the data before searching. Let me
give you this example. So now let's say
that the user is searching for this term
email and in your data you have as well
email at in different case. Everything
is lowered and the user just capitalized
the E at the start. So now in searching
we don't have to be very sensitive about
the values whether the user write it
capitalized or like lowercase. We want
to find a match whatever the case is.
But of course the values in Python are
case sensitive so Python going to say yo
those two values are completely
different. So if you go and print for
example search is equal equal to data
and execute it. As you can see, Python
gets a false. They are not equal. Now,
of course, we don't want that. We would
like to have it as true. What we can do
with that, we go and convert both my
data and the search term to one case.
So, for example, I go over here and say
and as well for my data, I'm going to
say lower. Now, it is already lowered,
but let's say that we have here a big A.
We don't know whether everything is
lowered in my system. Maybe in our
system we do not store everything in
lower case. So, just to make sure
everything is matching. Now, if you go
and execute it, you will get true
because now we are comparing the exact
same values with the exact same cases.
Now, of course, to make this perfect, we
have as well to think about the white
spaces. Let's say the user is searching
for email, but at the end he enters a
space and maybe in our data we don't
have like high quality and we have a
space at the start. Now, if you go and
execute it, you will get false and we
don't want that as well. It's still the
search should find the data because it's
the same word, email. So, what we can
do, we can go and apply our second
method that we just learned. So, strip,
it doesn't matter whether it's before or
after and the same thing for our data.
So, if you go and execute, you will get
true and with that we are cleaning up
the data twice. So, we are converting
the cases to a standard case, the lower
case and as well we are removing the
white spaces from left and right. So,
this is how you clean up your data
before matching it. So, now slowly you
are getting the feeling how powerful are
those functions and methods, right?
Let's move to the next [music] one.
Okay, friends. Now, time to challenge
your new skills and if you are able to
solve like 80% of it, then it going to
be amazing. So, now we have this messy
string that has a lot of informations. I
want you to clean this up and make it
more organized in one string. So, here
we have a name, role and age. I know
this one going to be challenging. So,
now go pause the video.
All right, my friends. So, as you can
see, this group [music] is very simple
but yet very powerful. And with that, we
have learned how to clean up the string
values and the text. This is very
important. Now, moving on to the next
group. Now, we're going to learn how to
search for something. And here, it's
important to understand this [music]
group will not go and modify anything in
your string values. So, all what is
happening here is we are searching for
something and we need answers. So, the
original values will not change. We will
just get answers. So, [music] let's
check this group.
Okay. So, now let's say that I have the
following value. So, I have again a date
where we have a year, then a month, like
February, and then a day. Now, of
course, this is a string value. And as
you can see, as I'm writing it from left
to right, we consider this to be the
start.
And then, the end of the string going to
be, of course, the end. And then, we
have here everything in between going to
be the middle. Now, again, our string
values contains a lot of informations.
Here, we have the year, the month, and
the day. Now, I would like to go and
search for specific information. Let's
say that I would like to go and search
for the first part, the year. Now, I
want to check whether my values always
starting with a 2026. And for that, we
can use the method starts with like
this. And then, we have to give it the
searching value. So, in this example, we
are searching for 2026 like this. So,
now once you execute it, what going to
happen? Python going to check, okay, we
are talking about the start. So, we're
going to start from the left side. And
then, it's going to say, okay, we need
here like four characters. So, it's
going to start counting 1 2 3 4 like
this. And now, all what's going to
happen is that Python going to go and
compare this value to the one that you
are searching for. Now, of course, it is
matching and that's why in the output,
you will get true.
So, as you can see, we are just
checking. We need only answer, yes or
no, true or false. So, that means the
output of this methods will not be like
another string value. It's going to be
the result of the check. So, it's going
to be Boolean.
Now, let's say that I would like to go
and check the end value of my string.
So, I'm checking the day, the last two
characters. So, now since are searching
from the end, we're going to use another
method, the exact opposite of the start.
So, it's going to be ends with, like
this. And as well, we have to go and
pass for it the value that you are
searching for. Let's say that this time
we are searching for the value 30. Now,
once you execute it, Python going to
check, "Okay, we are talking now about
the end." So, that means Python has to
check the end of the string, and then
it's going to go and check how many
characters we are searching for. It is
two. So, it's going to start like this,
from the right side, and then count two
characters until here. Now, Python going
to go and compare the data together with
the searching value. Now, as you can
see, it is not matching. That's why you
will get no. And no in Boolean going to
be false. So, now as you can see, those
two methods are really strict, but they
always have like starting position, and
then they start searching for something.
The same thing on the left side, on the
starts. So, it has starting position,
but sometimes this is very restrictive,
and I would like to search for a value
anywhere, and I don't care whether it is
at the start or at the end. It could be
anywhere in my string. So, now my
friends, for that, we don't have like
specific method. We use the operator in.
So, this is not method, this is an
operator, in order to search for
specific value in a string, and in the
output you get like yes or no, true and
false. So, you say, "Is February, for
example, in our string?" So, Python
going to start searching for this
combination, starting from the left, and
cover the whole value. And of course, in
this scenario, Python going to find the
combination inside the value, and in
return, we will get true.
So, as you can see, it is not very
restrictive like the start and the end.
If there is a match anywhere, then we
will get a true. So, now my friend,
those two methods, and as well the
operator, they are just checking if a
data exists. But now, sometimes we want
to search inside our data to find where
specific like value starts. So, we are
searching for specific position, not for
an answer yes or no. And for this kind
of search, we can go and use the method
find, and it is very similar. We pass to
it the value that you are searching for.
So, let's say again, we are searching
for the three character of the month.
Now, if you go and apply it, what can
happen? So, Python can start from the
left side and start checking the index
or the position. So, we have 0 1 2 3. So
far, we still don't have any match. And
then 4. And now comes something very
important. The position number 5. This
character is matching the first
character in our substring. And now it
is very important that all the following
characters must be matching. And of
course, everything is matching in this
example. And now the question is, what
we will get in return? We will not get
like yes and no, true and false. We will
get the starting position of our value.
So, that means in the outputs, we will
get an integer. So, we will get five.
So, this is the starting position.
So, this is exactly how the find method
works. But of course, for a different
purpose compared to the others. So, with
that, my friends, we have learned four
different techniques how to search for a
substring in a string. Right now, I'm
going to show you how I use those
functions in my real projects. Now
again, we have the same example with the
numbers. So, here we have like many
informations, like the country codes.
Then we have the number itself. So, now
let's say that I would like to check
whether my phone number is a German one.
And in order to do that, we have to
check the country code at the start. So,
we have to search for the combination
+49. And now I'm going to ask you, which
method we're going to use? Well, since
we are searching at the start, we're
going to use starts with. And now we
have to tell Python what you are
searching for. We want this combination
+49. So, let's go and check the result.
Now, as you can see, it is true. So,
yes, my phone number is a German one.
And if we have here some other country
code and executed, you will get false
because there is no match. And the first
three characters is not matching what we
are searching for. That's why we are
getting false. So, this is really nice
use case. Another one, let's say that we
have an email and we have something like
this, let's say bara@gmail.com.
Now, I would like to go and make a check
whether the email comes from the domain
gmail.com. So, that means we have to
search for this domain. So, gmail.com.
And since the domain is always at the
end of the email, that means we have to
use the method, I think you already know
it, ends with. And here we have to pass
that domain name. So, gmail.com. You can
add the at or not, it doesn't matter.
And then we have to go and print. So,
let's check that. With that we are
getting true. So, that means this email
is using the domain gmail.com. And if
you're using something else, like for
example Outlook, and execute it, you
will get false. So, this is a nice use
case with the ends with in order to
check the domains of an email. One more
nice use case, just quickly, let's have
a file and we have the data backup.csv.
Now, I want you to check whether the
extension of this file is a csv. Now
again, if you look to this, since csv at
the end, so that means I have to go and
use the ends with. And we search for the
extension .csv. And as usual, print.
Then execute. So, yes, my file is using
the extension csv. So, this is really
nice in order to validate the file names
in your system. All right, now let's
have another example about the emails.
Now, if the user is like giving us their
email address, we have to check for
something, whether the user is giving a
valid email. And one very important
character in our emails is the at. So,
we have to check whether the emails are
valid and they contain an at somewhere
in the email address. Now, since the at
is somewhere in the middle, we cannot go
use start with or ends with. We have to
go and use the operator in. So, we can
do it like this. We have now the value
that we are searching for in double
quotes, and then the at, and then after
that the operator in, and then the value
that you are searching inside it. So, it
is the email. Now, of course if you go
and execute it, you will not get
anything in the output. We have to print
as usual. So, let's go and execute. Now
you can see we have true. So, yes, in
our email we have an at. Now, if I go
and remove it from here and then
execute, you will see it is false and
this is really nice indicator that this
email is not a valid one. Without an at,
it is not an email address. So, this is
really nice use case for the in operator
to validate the emails. Another example
that I used last time, let's say that we
have this URL where we have the https
{double point} slashes and then
api.saycompany.com
and then version one data, something
like this. And I was validating the URLs
whether they contain the API. So, I
wanted to detect whether there is like
an API call or not in the URL and I have
solved it like this. So, I said, "I'm
searching for {slash} API." And then the
operator in our URL. Let's go and
execute. What's that? Well, yes. So, we
are getting true. There is an API call
in this URL and I used it in my logic in
order to do something. So, this is
really nice, easy and very useful. Okay,
so now let's have a real example about
the find and here I have to tell you
something that find is always combined
with some other task. So, it is like
assisting us to do another thing. Let me
show you what I mean exactly. We have
this phone number. So, this is the first
one and let's have another phone number.
So, phone two. And this time we're going
to have it like this, like 48 then some
other
number. Now, I would like to get only
the phone number without the country
codes. So, I would like to extract a
part of the phone number and I don't
want all those stuff, the plus 48 minus.
Now, we can do that of course using the
slice. So, for the phone number one, we
can go and open two brackets and we
start counting like 0 1 2 3 and 4. So,
we start with our position number four
and then we want to get everything else.
So, we don't have to specify an end.
Let's go and print it and then execute.
So, with that we are getting the first
phone number. Okay, so now let's go and
extract the number from the second
phone. Again, the slicing. Now, here we
don't have a plus, so we cannot start
from four. We can start from 0 1 2 3.
So, we're going to start from 3 and the
rest. Let's go and execute it. So, that
I'm getting as well the phone number
without the country code. Now, of
course, this is annoying, right? For
each phone number I have to go and start
counting and the data is not clean.
Sometimes it start with a plus,
sometimes without. Maybe in other cases
we have a third phone like this where we
have two zeros. So, the starting
position is always like different and I
am lazy. I don't want each time to go
and count. Now, we need an assistant. We
need another methods to find for us the
starting position. And my friend, we can
go and use the find function. So, let's
see how we can do that. I would like to
find the first minus. So, it's very
simple. We say phone one dot then find
and we are searching for the first
minus. So, let's check what we will get
and then execute. So, as you can see we
are getting the position number three,
which is totally correct. 0, 1, 2, 3.
Now, this number three is not the
starting position for our slicing. We
want to start from the next character
from the position number four. Well, it
going to be always like this. It's
always like plus one. So, let's go and
test that. Now, instead of four we going
to go and completely replace it with the
find. So, now instead of having static
number, the four, we are having the
output of the method find. So, as you
can see now things are not static. Now,
things are more dynamic and we are
nesting stuff together. So, again, this
is the start and then double point and
we don't have an end. Let's go and
execute it. And here as you can see we
have an issue that we have here a minus.
Now, all what you have to do is to go
over here and say plus one. So, 3 + 1
you will get four and you will get again
the exact same starting position. So,
let's go and execute it. Now, we got the
same result. So, 176. This is our phone
number without us at all counting the
positions. So, now it is way smarter
than before. Of course, it is a little
bit more complicated, but it is dynamic.
Now, let's go and take the whole thing
and replace the three with our smart
code phone two.
This is the issue of copy and paste. So,
we are finding now in the string two
character minus. So, 0 1 2 2 + 1 you
will get three. It should be fine. Let's
go and execute it. Now, as you can see
we are getting as well the phone number
without specifying any static value for
the starting point. Totally smart. Now,
let's go and test it for the phone
number three. I'm just going to go and
copy paste and let's go and say phone
three phone three. So, without counting,
without checking anything, I'm going to
go and execute it and I'm pretty sure
I'm getting the phone number. So, you
can see things are a little bit
complicated, but if you do it step by
step and you understand each step what
you are doing, it will be very easy to
make smart thing. And this exactly how
we use the find in order to find the
index or the position of a specific
character and then we use this
information to pass it to another task.
So, this is why we have find and how we
use it. Okay, so this is how you can
search for things in Python. Now, we're
going to move to the last group. We will
learn how to check and validate our
value. We have here two methods in order
to check and validate the content of our
string. So, let's [music] check this
group.
Now, all what you are doing [music] here
is we are checking and validating. We
are checking the quality of our string
values. So, now sometimes we have like
expectations on our values and we would
like to check these expectations. Like
for example, we make some expectations
that the country should be always
characters. So, we should not have any
numbers or any other special characters.
So, for that we can use the method is
alpha. It is very simple. It's going to
go and check whether the string has only
letters. So, it is only made of
alphabetics. So, we can go and validate
our country by using the method is alpha
like this. We don't have to pass any
value for the methods and then of
course, we're going to go and print it.
So, let's go and check. Now, we are
getting true. That means the value of
the country here has only letters. Of
course, let's say the user give the
country, but at the end like we have a
table. Now, let's check whether it going
to pass our quality check. Well, no, we
have a false. It means this is not a
valid country for us and there is like
something wrong inside it. And the same
thing if you have like any special
character like hash and if you go and
execute it as well, you will get false.
So, we are expecting only alphabetics,
only letters. This is really nice if you
have some expectations on your values to
have a quick check on your data. Okay,
so now moving on we have another method.
This time we're going to check whether
the string value has only numbers. So,
it contains only digits. It has no
characters or any special characters.
So, again our nice example with the
phone and here we have the phone number.
Now, I would like to go and check
whether we have a clean phone number
without any characters. So, we can go
and apply our nice methods is numeric
and prints. So, let's go and execute it.
So, as you can see we are getting true
because the string contains only
numbers. But now, let's say that we have
here somewhere in minus a special
character and we check, we will get
false because of this special character.
It is not a number. So, if your string
has only numbers, you will get a true.
And one more thing about the is numeric,
if you have something like this, it will
not be accepted. So, I know this is like
float number, but the dot considered to
be a special character and it will not
be accepted. We are talking only about
numbers. So, as you can see those
methods are really amazing in order to
check the content of your string and to
validate your expectations. And with
that you can build quality checks and
gates in order to prevent having, let's
say, garbage and bad data inserted to
your application. So, with that you can
check the content of your string values.
Okay, my friends, so that's all for the
last group and as well, that's all for
the road map on how to do things to our
string values. So, now you are equipped
with a lot of tools. Now, you know how
to convert the data types, how to
measure and do calculations on our
string values, how to transform and
reshape your string values with their
combining, splitting, extracting, and as
well how to improve the data quality by
cleaning up the data and bringing the
data into standards. And we have learned
as well how to search for specific thing
in our string. So, if you are building
any search functions in your
application, I'm sure you will be using
those stuff a lot. And the last one have
to check and validate the content of
your string. So, with that you have
gained skill now about something very
important in the data world that you
might hear. You might hear someone
saying, "Ah, I'm doing data trans
formations or data manipulations, or we
are building pipelines to clean up the
data." So, actually all what they are
doing, they are using those functions to
prepare the data for analysis. So, as a
data engineer or a data analyst, you
will be using those stuff for sure.
Okay, now looking back to our road map,
with that you have learned all the tools
in order to work with the strings. But
of course, not everything is strings. We
have as well numbers. That's why we have
the next chapter where you're going to
learn as well the tools in order to work
with this type. So, let's dive in. By
the way, friends, if you would like to
have an access to all those sketches and
my notes for Python, you can find my
Python handbook. There you're going to
see around 200 pages, only sketches and
notes about the course. You can check
the link in the description. Now, let's
go back to the course.
So, let's start with the first question.
What are numeric values in Python? We
have learned that the numeric values or
the numbers, they are just a data type
that belongs to the primitive data types
or the single values. The numeric data
like exist in any programming language.
So, once you create a number, Python has
to treat it as a number. And in Python,
we don't have like one numeric data
type. We have different ways on how we
represent numbers in Python. The first
data type we call it integer. This is
the most famous one. So, here we have a
whole number, no decimal points, just a
whole value, positive or negative. Like
for example, 5, -12, 10,000. All of
those are whole numbers, they are
integers. And now we have another data
type called a float. They are just
numbers with decimal points like 3.15,
-0.5,
100.0.
So that means we have always a decimal
points and decimal numbers after the
points. Well, we use this format in
order to represent for example
percentages or as we are calculating the
average or measuring the temperature. So
floating are awesome when the details
matters, of course. Now moving on to
another data type called complex. So
they are like numbers with two parts, a
real number and imaginary parts. Like
for example, 2 + 3G. Well, I know that
sounds a little bit complicated, but
don't worry about it. Most of you will
not use it. This is only for advanced
math, engineering, science, physics, and
Python supported in order to do some
advanced scientific work. So those are
the three numeric data types and each
one of them has a job. And my friend, we
have a lot of functions and operators
that we could use in order to manipulate
the numeric values in Python. And like
the string data type, I have grouped
those functions and operators under
categories and purposes. We have here
like four built-in functions that we
could use in order to check and convert
the data types. And as well, we have
many operators in order to do the basic
math in Python. So the usual stuff, the
plus, minus, multiply, and so on. Then
we have very important group, how to
round numbers. Those functions are the
most used one if you are dealing with
numbers. Then after that, we have
advanced stuff. If you want to do
advanced mathematics, you have here as
well those methods, the sign, cosine,
log, pi, and so on. And then we have
another group in order to generate
random numbers in Python. This is as
well useful one for projects. And the
last group, we have a method and a
function in order to validate our
numbers. Now about the coloring again,
those red ones, they are the built-in
functions in Python. The yellow one are
the operators. And now if you look to
this, we don't have here like a
belongs to the class number in order to
manipulate the numbers like we have in
the string. In the string there are a
lot of methods of the class string in
order to change the value and the data,
but here we don't have any but instead
we have a lot of green stuff. Those are
functions that are not built in, those
are from the module math or random. Do
you remember in the data types intro as
we talked about the libraries and the
module? We have understood in Python
there is like standard library and then
inside it there are modules. So far we
have used a lot of functions and methods
inside the built in. And here we have
the functions like the type, print,
length, and as well we have the methods
that belongs to each data type. You
remember in the string we have the
upper, lower, replace and so on. And the
same thing for the integer, but we don't
have like important stuff. Now in Python
in order to do advanced mathematical
stuff with the numbers, we have to go
and import a module called math or
random and there you can find very
useful functions for the numbers. And
again the big difference between this
module the math and the built in that
each time you are using those functions
in this module, you have to go and
import it. This will not happen
automatically, you have to go in your
code and say okay import for me the
mathematical module. Otherwise you
cannot use the functions underneath this
module. We didn't face this issue
because Python thinks that string
function is very important and we going
to end up each time like doing some
manipulations for the text, that's why
we have it here everything underneath
the string. And for the integers we have
only the basic operators, but if you
want to get advanced stuff you have to
go and import it. That's why we have
here a lot of functions from another
module the math and the random. So now
what we going to do, we going to go and
check those functions and operators and
we going to start with the first group
data types. So let's learn how to check
the types of the numbers and as well how
to do data type conversions. Let's go.
Okay, so now let's start with the basic
stuff. We going to go and create a
number like for example an integer. So
since we don't have any decimal number,
this going to be an integer. Now, let's
go and create another one. This one
going to be a decimal number, so it's
going to be a float. So, 5.7. Now, we
are talking about another data type.
This is not anymore integer, this is a
float. And the crazy one, we have the
complex data type. For example, 2 + 3j.
So, now those are our values, our
numbers, and now we can do something
about it. Like for example, we can go
and print the type of our value. So, for
example, let's type the first one and
execute it. You can see it is from the
class integer. So, it is working fine.
Let's go and print the type of the
second value. So, let's go and execute.
You can see it is a float because of the
decimal point. And let's go and print
the type of the last value and execute.
You can see it is from the class
complex. All right, so this is the first
thing that we can do to our numbers.
Let's move to the next one. It's all
about how to convert the data type to
numeric data type. Like for example, you
might be in situation where you have a
value like this, where you have
everything between two double quotes and
you have a number. So, now if you go and
print the type of this value, you will
get a string. And since your number is a
string, Python going to handle it as a
string. Like for example, if you say, I
would like to go and multiply my number,
my value like three times. If you go and
execute it, Python will not go and
multiply the number itself. Python going
to go and repeat the value three times.
So, that means Python handle this as a
number and I don't want that. I would
like it as a real number, not anymore as
a string. So, what I can do, I can say X
and then we can go and use the INT the
building function and pass it this
value. So, now
if I go and print the type, it will
looks like this. So, this time we have
it as an integer. And if you go and
multiply it now, for example, three
times, you will get 72. So, this time
Python is handling this value, the 24,
as a number and multiply it correctly as
a number, not anymore as a string. Let's
have another example. Let's say that I
have a floating number like 3.14. Now,
this is a float and I can go and convert
it to an integer, to a whole number. So,
for example, I can go and do it like
this. Then, we can say integer the
variable X. So, if you go and execute
it, you will get only three, only the
whole number, and you will not have any
decimal numbers. So, this is one way in
order to get rid of the decimal numbers
if you want. Now, the same thing if you
have like a number like three, so this
is of course an integer, you can go and
convert it to a float. So, we can go and
use the built-in function float and give
it our value, and then execute. Now, as
you can see, it is still three, but we
have here a decimal point and then zero.
So, that means this is not a whole
number, this is a float number. So, you
can convert between integer and float
easily using those built-in functions.
And as well, the same things if you have
like a string value, let's say 0.14, so
this is string value, and Python going
to handle it as a string, but if you
want to go and convert it to a float,
you can go and use the float function.
So, let's go and execute it. So, now
it's not anymore a string value, it is a
float. So, again, this built-in function
going to go and convert any value to a
float data type. Now, about the complex
data type, you need two values. Let's
say we have X is equal to three and Y is
equal to four. You can go and say
complex and then go pass to it the X and
Y. So, X is the real parts and four is
the imaginary parts. So, now if you go
and execute it, you will get a complex
data type. So, again, it is for advanced
scientific stuff. So, my friends, that's
it for the first group. So, it is very
simple, and now moving on to another
very simple group. We have the math
operators. As well, this is something
that you can do in order to manipulate
your numbers. So, let's go.
All right, let's go quickly through all
those operators. I know this is a little
bit awkward, we are doing those simple
operators, but we're going to go through
them. So, the additional operator, 2 +
3, we have five, and let's move to the
next one, 5 - 3, guess what? Two. And
the next one, the multiplier, 4
multiplied with 2, eight. And the next
one, the division. So, we divide 7 by 2
and in the answer we will get float
number, so 3.5. So, now sometimes it
might be really annoying to have those
decimal numbers. So, I would like to go
and divide two numbers quickly and the
result I would like it to have it as an
integer. So, now after it is divided, it
should be like rounded. And of course,
we can do that in Python. If we divide
two numbers using two division, we call
it the floor division. It's actually not
a round or ceiling, it is floor. We can
learn about those mechanism later. So,
now all what can happen here, we can
have three. So, we will not get floating
points. It can return [music] an integer
and the numbers are like rounded. Now,
we have another one, which is really
nice. If you use the percentage between
two numbers, this operator can return
the leftover after the division. So, now
in the output you will get the leftover
after dividing 7 by 2. It's like this,
like we have three groups. So, the total
of this is six and we have one leftover
that doesn't not fit with the two,
right? And now you might ask, when we
going to need this type of operator?
Well, usually we use it in order to
detect whether our numbers are even or
odd. Like for example, if I go over here
and say 10 and execute it, you will get
zero. So, that means 10 is an even
number. But, if you have an odd number,
you will get one. So, this is really
nice operator to detect whether your
values, your numbers are odd or even.
Now, moving on to the last one, we have
the exponents. Two and then twice the
multiplier and then another number like
three. So, the first number is the base
and the second number is the exponents.
It tells you how many times you want to
multiply the base number. So, if you go
and execute it, you will get eight. So,
all what we are doing here, we are
multiplying the two three times. So, as
you can see, be careful whether you are
using one division or two divisions. It
has different meanings for Python. And
as well here, be careful with the
percentage. It is not division, it is a
remainder. Okay, moving on, we going to
talk about the shortcuts that we can use
for the operators. Now, let's say that
we have the following scenario where we
say we are creating variable and inside
it the number two. Now, after that, we
might go and add to this value like
three. Usually, we do it like this, we
say X is equal to the current value of
the X, then plus three. So, now as we
learned Python, we're going to go and
grab the value two, add to it the three,
and then assign everything to the X
again, to itself. So, that means X now
going to have five, right? So, if we go
and print it,
you will get five in the output. Now,
for exactly for this scenario, we have a
shortcut in Python where we can say,
"Okay, X is equal." And then we say
before the equal, we're going to assign
the operator. So, I'm saying I would
like to add something to the current
value of the X. And then afterward, we
say the value. So, now those two are
doing exactly the same thing. It is just
shorter and I don't have to repeat like
twice the X. I'm saying for Python, go
and add the value three to whatever the
current value inside the X. Now, if I go
and comment in this out and then
execute, you will get five. So, this is
like a shortcut. If you want to do a
mathematical operation on your variable,
you don't have to repeat it twice, just
put the operator that you are using
before the equal and then the value
itself. And we can go and use any
operator, of course. So, we can say
minus equal, then let's say one,
print X again, then execute. Now, it is
four. And you can go as well multiply it
with two, and then of course, print, you
will get eight. So, this is way nicer
than saying X is equal to X multiply
with two. So, as you can see, this one
is longer than the previous one, and
this is just a quick and nice one. Okay,
my friends, so that's all about the
basic math, the basic operators that you
have in Python. Now, moving on to the
next one, this one going to be
interesting. We will learn how to round
the numbers. [music] So, let's go.
Let's say that [music] I have this
scenario. I want to measure the distance
between two points. The first point is
two, and the second one is 10. Now, if
you go and print the distance between
those two points, you will get minus
eight. Now, if I want to get rid of the
sign, so that means I'm interested only
on the absolute number. So, now in order
to do this in Python, we have the
built-in function abs. It is very
simple. It going to return the absolute
number without having any minus sign.
So, let's go and apply it. It's very
simple. abs, and then put the whole
thing inside it. Now, let's go and
execute it. You can see now I get rid of
the minus sign, and I have the absolute
number. This is very practical if you
want to measure the distance or the size
of something, and you are not interested
whether it is like positive or negative.
So, this is only dedicated for numbers.
Okay, so this is very nice and simple
function. Now, moving on to the next
one, we're going to talk about rounding
numbers.
So, now as we learned before in the text
and the string values, they might be
messy, a lot of like problems and data
quality issues. Well, not only that, our
numbers could be as well bad. Like for
example, let's say that we have a price,
and we can have like some crazy stuff,
like 35, and then we have a lot of
numbers after the decimal. And this is
of course could be the output of some
complex calculations, or someone in your
application did add those complex
numbers. So, this is not friendly, hard
to read, and so on. And I would like to
make it smaller and reduce maybe the
number of the decimal numbers. Now, in
order to do that, we have multiple
options, and now we're going to learn
them one by one. Okay, so now let's say
that we have two whole number, the one
and two, and in between them we have
decimal numbers. Now, if you have a
decimal value between those two, we call
the two as the ceiling, and one as a
floor. It's like your apartment, you
have a ceiling and floor, and you have
to decide whether you want your values
to go to the floor or to the ceiling.
So, for example, you have the method
floor, and your decimal number is 1.3.
The floor method going to go and drop
down everything to the floor. So, the
1.3 going to go to the floor one, and if
you have like another value exactly in
the middle, 1.5, this value going to go
as well to the floor, to the one. And
even if you have 1.7, which is very
close to the ceiling, if you apply the
floor, it going to go as well to the
floor. So, floor means down to the
ground. You always round down, if you if
you are just about to reach the ceiling.
Now, let's switch to the exact opposite,
the ceiling. Now, as the name says, it
going to take you to the ceiling. So,
again, the same examples, if you have
1.3, this will jump up to the two, to
the ceiling. Now, if you have in the
middle, 1.5, it's going to jumps you up
to the two. And the last one, the 1.7,
this as well going to take you to the
ceiling, to the two. So, if you are
optimistic, you going to go and use the
ceiling, where you going to lift
everything from down to top. Now, we
come to the third one, this is the
built-in function round. And of course,
Python decision is based on which whole
number you are closer to. So, for
example, the 1.3, this one is close to
the floor. So, that means Python going
to round it down to the floor, to one.
And now, if you have the value 1.7, this
time you are closer to the ceiling, you
are almost there. That's why Python
going to go around it up, so that you
will get two. But now, of course, you
going to ask, "What about the 1.5?" It
is exactly in the middle. For that,
Python has a special rule called round
half to even. Sometimes, we call it
banker's rounding. So, now Python going
to check, "Okay, I have here one and
two." And since two is an even number,
that means Python going to round it up.
So, it going to bring it to the ceiling.
It is not anymore about the distance,
it's all about whether it is odd or
even. Okay, so let's have this example
to understand what this exactly means.
Now, we have four boundaries, 1 2 3 4.
And let's take the middle values, like
for example, between one and two, we
have the 1.5. As we learned, it going to
go to the even number, and the even
number here is two. So, we are doing a
round up. Now, let's take the middle
value between two and three, so we have
2.5. Now, what is the even number
between three and two? Well, still two.
So, that's why Python this time going to
go around it down. So, you will get in
the output two, because of the rule.
Now, let's go to the last one, between
three and four, we have in the middle
3.5. And between the two boundaries,
what is the even number? It is the four.
So, what going to happen? Python going
to go and roll up to the four. So, this
is exactly what going to happen in
Python if you are rounding the half.
Okay, so now we have this annoying
price, and let's go round it using the
three functions. Let's start first with
the built-in function that we have from
Python. So, we're going to say round the
price. So, let's go and execute it. So,
now as you can see, everything is
rounded up to the 36. We don't have any
more of those annoying decimal numbers.
So, with that, as you can see, we are
moving our numbers to the closest
boundary. But, I would like to go and
move everything to the floor always. So,
for that, we're going to go and use the
function floor and put the price inside
it. But, now as you can see, there is
like something wrong. We are not getting
like a new color. And if you go and
execute it, you will get an error cuz
Python don't understand what it is.
Python don't know anything about this
function, and that's because this is not
built-in function. This function exists
somewhere in the standard library, but
first you have to import it. And in
order to do that, we're going to go at
the start of our code, and we say
import, and then we need the module
math. So, each time you need this
function, the floor, you have to go
first and import it. It's like you are
installing the module in your code. And
of course, if you go and create a new
Python code, you have to import it
again. So, this is only available for
this script where I'm doing now my code.
Now, still Python don't understand what
is the floor, and that's because we have
first to say math. dots. And with that,
we are saying, "Okay, this functions
comes from the module math." And with
that, you can see we are getting the
color of it. And if you go and execute
it, you will not get an error, but we
will not see anything because we are not
printing. So, you say print, then let's
go and execute. So, now as you can see,
our price now is 35. So, we are bringing
the prices down. Now, of course, if you
want to take everything to the ceiling,
you use the function seal. And the same
thing, Python does not know this
function. You have to go and say, "This
one exists in the math module." And now
you will get the color, and you will not
get any error. So, let's go and execute
it. So, it's going to be very similar to
the round because we are rounding up.
Okay, so now there is like something
special about the round function. We
could use it in order to maintain some
decimal numbers. Like for example, I'm
going to say, "Okay, this is really
ugly. I don't want to have all those
decimals. I still want to see some
details like maybe only two decimals."
So, we can go and use the round like
this and we say price and then after
that we say comma and we decide how many
decimals should be left in the output.
Like for example, two. So, this time
Python will not go and like remove
everything after the decimal. It's going
to round it until the second decimal
number. So, let's print it and check
that out and then execute. Now, as you
can see our number is 35.55.
So, we are having here floats and not
anymore an integer. So, all those other
numbers are integer, but if you here
specify like two in the output of the
round function, you will get a float
number. And of course, you can go and
say, "I would like to have only one
decimal." Like this and you will get
only five. This is only available for
the round. You cannot use it [music] for
the floor or the ceiling. Okay, so now
you might say, "You know what? I don't
want to round any numbers. I don't want
to decide between the ceiling and the
floor and all those complicated stuff. I
just want to get rid of all those
decimals. I just want to get the first
part, the whole number." Well, you can
use that of course using the function
trunk. So, the function trunk going to
strictly remove all the decimals. No
rounding at all. It's going to leave
only the integer part. So, let's try it
out. It's math.trunk and then our price.
We're going to print it. Now, let's go
and execute. It is the last one. It's
going to be 35. So, it is really fast.
Python will not go and round anything.
It will just get you the integer part at
the start. Now, you might say, "You know
what? If you don't want to round
anything and you want to just get the
integer part, why don't we just go and
use the int function? It's going to go
and convert the float to an integer,
right?" And with that we're going to
remove all the decimals. So, we're going
to say integer, the price and you go and
print it. So, if you go and execute it,
you will get as well the same results.
Well, my friends, you are totally right.
This is another way on how to get rid of
the decimal numbers. And now you might
say, "Okay, then when do use the trunk
and when to use the integer?" And I'm
going to say it like this. If you want
to go and import the math only for the
trunk, only in order to get rid of the
decimals, then just go use the ints.
But, if you are already having the math
because doing any other operations, it
is not really bad to go and use the
trunk because it is easier to
understand. By just looking to this
code, I know, "Okay, I'm using the trunk
in order to get rid of the decimals."
Which is really clear for me. But, if I
look to the int, I might wonder, "Is my
price here like a string?" And maybe I'm
converting the string maybe to an
integer. By just reading the code, it
can be really hard and I might think
that you are using it because the price
is a string. And now you might still ask
me, "When do I use round, floor, and
ceiling?" Well, I can tell you most of
the time I use the round function cuz I
can control exactly how many decimals
I'm going to leave. Especially if you're
doing data visualizations and reporting,
you don't want to show such a big
numbers in your reports. You would like
to make everything like smaller cuz you
don't have space for that. That's why we
usually use the round function in order
to make our float numbers smaller. And
now there is like another scenario where
I use the ceiling. It is not in data
analysis, I use it in data engineering.
Especially if I'm doing something like
called paginating, patching, or let's
say resource allocations. I want to be
optimistic and to make sure that I have
always enough resources to make sure
that I'm not missing anything. So, if
you want to make sure always that you
have enough resources, go with the
ceiling. But, for data analysis and
reporting and stuff, most of the time
going to end up using the round
function. Okay, my friends, so with that
we have covered everything in this
group, important functions that we could
use in order to manipulate your numbers.
And I usually use those stuff more than
the other ones. Now, moving on to the
next one, we have the advanced math. In
this module, the math, we have a lot of
advanced stuff that we could use in
order to make complex formulas like the
sine, cosine, log, and so on. We will
not deep dive into that. That's why we
have documentations, so you can go and
try them out. But now I would like to go
to the next group. We have the random.
And now this one is more fun than the
mathematical stuff. So here we have
another module called random, and we can
generate random numbers using those
functions. [music]
Okay, so now what we're going to do?
First, we have to go and import the
module random. And then all what you
have to do is very simple. You can say
random.random.
So this one is a function and going to
go and generate a random decimal number
between 0 and 1. So let's try this out.
So we're going to say print. Let's check
the random number that we're going to
get. So we have it here, 0.49 blah blah
blah. And of course you will not get the
exact same number each time you execute
it. You will get different numbers. So
now we have 0.78.
So each time I execute it, I'm going to
get a random number. Now if you want to
say, "Yeah, I didn't expect to get a
floating number. I would like to have
like a normal integer number. Like I'm
rolling a dice or something." So in
order to do that, we have another
function. We have random.randint,
integer. This function going to go and
generate an integer number between a
range that you specify. Like for
example, let's say the range is between
1 and 6. So I want a random integer
number between this range. Now let's go
and print it and check. Let's go and put
this in comment and execute. So for me,
I got five. If I go and repeat it again,
I'm going to get three. And here six,
four, and so on. So as you can see, each
time I execute, I'm going to get an
integer number between the boundaries 1
and 6. So now this might sound like
funny, rolling a dice and so on. But
when do we use this in real projects?
Like is there any like real serious use
case for this? Well, of course there is
like an important one. We use it in
order to generate dummy data or sample
data for testing. Sometimes as we are
testing like functions, pipelines,
dashboards, we want to have like
sometimes fake and dummy data. And in
order to do that, we could use those
random functions in order to generate
the dummy data. For example, an age I'm
going to go and use the rand int where I
say, "Okay, the customer's range is
between, for example, like 20 and 50."
Or you can go and use the random in
order to generate prices. And as well,
maybe the random integer to generate the
user ID and the customer ID. So, we
could use it in order to generate dummy
data for testing. So, what you can do
you use the random function in order to
generate like random 10 IDs and then
pick randomly 10 customers from the
large data set. We call this like random
sampling. So, my friend, there is like
real use cases for those functions. It's
not only fun one. And there are like
many scenarios that I can think of for
those random functions. Okay, so that's
all about how to generate random numbers
in Python. Let's move to the next one.
We have the validation. And here we have
a methods and built-in function in order
to validate our numbers. So, let's go.
So, now let's say that we have a float
number like this, 7.0.
Now, I would like to check whether my
float number is actually a whole number.
So, here we have like .0. This looks
like a whole number, right? Now, I would
like to check whether I have something
after the decimals or not. And with
that, we have a built-in methods for the
class floats and it is the is integer.
So, we can do it like this, x. Since
this is a methods, we have to make dot
and then after it, we write the methods
name. So, is integer like this. And of
course, we have to go and print it to
see the outputs. This going to return
either true or false. So, in this
scenario, it is true because we don't
have a real decimals after the decimal
points. But now, let's go and copy this
to another number. Let's say this time
we have 7.1.
And let's go and execute it. So, this is
not a whole number. This is a decimal
number because here we have one, not
zero. So, with that, I can check whether
my floating numbers are actually a whole
number or are they real float numbers?
This is very important if you have like
a new data and you are checking the
quality of the data. So, if you open
like a file, you will see like a lot of
values, but they always end like let's
say with zeros.
Maybe it is like an parsing issue or an
export issue. My data is actually whole
numbers, but in the outputs, somehow
they are converted to float numbers.
Now, of course, as I'm doing like data
engineering, I don't want to round
numbers and maybe make something wrong
because I don't really understand the
business behind those numbers and
whether it's allowed to be rounded and
so on. So, first I check are they really
whole numbers? If it's like this, like
it's always zeros, then I can go and
make it as an integer without losing any
data. So, this is really great check in
order to understand are my float numbers
are actually an integers, but they just
have like a bad formats. Okay, so this
one is nice. Let's move to the next one.
Let's say that I have the following
variable, like I have 70, and I would
like to check the data type whether it
is an integer or not. So, I can go and
use the built-in function is instance.
So, it's going to check whether my value
belong to a specific data type and it
needs like two things, the value itself
and the data type that I am expecting,
like for example, an integer. That's
all. Let's go and print it. Now, I'm
asking Python is my value an integer?
So, let's go and execute it. You can see
it's true. Now, let's go and convert it
to a float and then execute it. You can
see it says false because my value is
not an integer. And of course, you can
use this for any value and any data
type. Like for example, the same thing
is print is instance. And now, I'm going
to say is this a float? You can see it's
going to say yes, true. This is of
course an easy to see in my code, but if
I'm getting like a value from my users,
I would like to go and validate it first
whether it meets the expectations or
not. And this function we usually use it
in order to build a logic and conditions
and this is exactly what can happen in
the next chapter. So, those are your
tools, your operators, functions,
methods, and as well the modules that
you can use for the numeric values. And
I would say use this as a cheat sheet.
If you have any numbers, you can check
this quickly out to understand aha, if I
want to do rounding, I have those like
five options. So, that's nice and to be
honest, I'm using this as well for my
project now. Okay, I'm not going to
leave you like this. We're going to have
like one challenge. Generate [music] a
random integer from 1 to 100 and check
the output if it's even. So, it is
simple. Go pause the video and solve it.
[music]
Okay, so now while clicking back to our
road map, actually that's it for the
numbers. It was quick. So, with this we
have completed the two chapters and now
you can say, I can work with data. Now,
after that we're going to move to
something deeper. We have here three
chapters with one idea, how to control
the execution of your Python code. So,
we're going to start with the first
chapter where we're going to learn logic
and operators. So, you're going to learn
how Python understand the truth and
false, how to do comparison, how to
build the logic, how to build the
conditions, how to combine them. So,
we're going to learn all the important
tools in order to build something like a
brain inside your code. So, let's dive
in.
For and while. So, now let's start with
the first question, what are you talking
about? What is a control flow in a code
[music] and why do we need it in the
first place? So, let's go. Control flow
is like a logic you build inside your
code to control the path your program
follows. So, this logic going to tell
Python, should I run this part? Should I
skip it? Should I repeat it? So, it's a
logic in your code to decide what to do
next. Let's understand what this means
exactly. So, so far what we have done is
we have a Python script and we start
from top to bottom writing commands step
by step like a print this, assign that,
get an input from user, print again. So,
it's like you are creating to do list
[music] for Python and once you execute
it, Python has to go from the top and
start executing your command step by
step until it reach the bottom of your
code. So, as you can see here, we don't
have any control flow. Everything going
to be executed like a straight line. So,
it's like driving your car in an empty
straight highway. There is no turns, no
traffic lights, just single line from
start to end. Sounds peaceful, right?
But, here's the thing. Real life isn't
like that. You don't just go in straight
line forever. Life is messy. Sometimes
you drive into a busy city. There are
forks, bridges, hundreds of signs,
traffic lights left and right, and
sometimes the conditions change, like
the engine is too hot or maybe there is
like a storm. Sometimes you have to stop
and exit. And this is exactly what
happens in coding. We have complex tasks
and we have to control the flow of our
codes. Okay, so let's check this. The
first way to control the flow of your
code by building something called
conditional statements. So, how this
looks like in your codes? Let's say that
you start writing your code as normal
and then you come to a point where you
have two blocks of codes, one on the
left and one on the right, but you don't
want to execute both of them. So, you
want to execute one of them based on a
question. So, that means you build like
a question inside your code. We call it
condition and based on the answer, if
the condition is true, you go to the
right block of code, but if the answer
for the question is false, you go to the
left side. So, with that you are
building like a logic or a decision. So,
now let's say that you executed this,
what going to happen? The first of block
of code going to executed as normal and
then the question going to be asked
inside your codes. And if it's true,
then it's going to go to the right side
and start executing the right block. And
then after that, the last block of code
going to be executed as normal. As you
can see now, we have a piece of code
that is not executed. So, that means
with that we are not executing the whole
thing. Now, let's say that you have
executed again and after asking the
question, the answer was no, it is
false, then this time the left part
going to be executed and then Python
goes to the last part and executed as
well. So, as you can see, this time we
went to the left side and the right
block of code is completely ignored. So,
my friend, it's like a crossroads in
your code. Python comes into
intersection, then checks the sign and
choose one way or other. Once it goes to
this path, of course, it keep going to
the end of the code. So, this is one way
how to make decisions using conditional
statements in your code. But now, what
about if you want to repeat something?
So, you want to keep going until certain
condition is met. And for that, we build
something in our code called a loop. So,
think about it like this. Imagine you
are cleaning your room. You just don't
go and pick one t-shirt and stop. You
keep going t-shirt after t-shirt, and
you keep going cleaning stuff in your
room until one condition is met. And
that is your room is clean. The floor is
clean. So, what you have just done in
your room a loop. By the way, if your
room is not clean,
go and do that. Same thing, my friend,
in coding. Instead of repeating the same
task over and over, what we can do, we
can go and build a loop to execute the
same code multiple times. So, how this
looks like in coding? You're going to
start normally doing few stuff, and then
you come to piece of a task that you
want to repeat it. So, what you're going
to do, you're going to build again here
question or condition, and based on the
answer, if it's like true, then it going
to go to the code that we want to keep
repeating, execute it completely, and
then go and ask the same question. So,
if the answer is now still true, Python
going to go again and execute the same
code from the top to the bottom, and
then go back and ask the same question.
As you can see, we have now the shape of
loop, and Python keep executing this
block of code until we have different
answer. Once Python gets the answer that
it wants, then it going to break the
loop and go to the rest of your code.
So, as you can see, we are controlling
the flow here, where we are making like
a loop inside our code in order to
repeat the same task over and over. So,
now, my friend, with that, you have now
two superpowers in order to control the
flow of your code. You can make
decisions using the conditional
statements, or you can repeat actions
and tasks using loop. So, by looking to
this, you can move your code from
something simple to smart, where your
program going to think, choose, and act.
And believe me, you will end up using
these everywhere.
Now, in order to build all those [music]
stuff in Python, we need tools. Now, I'm
going to show you the whole road map,
all the tools that we can use in order
to control the flow. And I split it into
two main sections. The first one, it is
the control flow statements. So, they
are like special instructions that you
can use in Python to change the flow.
And here we have like two subsections,
the conditional statements, if, else,
else if. So, this stuff going to help us
to make decisions. And the other section
here we have the repetition, the loops.
And here we have two important
statements, the for loop and the while
loop. And as well, we have some
statements to skip stuff like the break,
continue, and pass. So, those statements
are the core building blocks that we can
use in order to build the logic, control
the flow of our codes. Now, the
statements alone is not enough. We need
something essential. We need to give
them conditions, the questions, the
rules that Python going to check. And
here where the Boolean expressions comes
in. So, now we have a lot of different
ways on how to build the expressions,
like either using the values or maybe
functions that returns true or false.
And as well, we could use a lot of
operators in order to check something,
like the comparison operator, the
logical operator. We have membership and
identity. So, now my friends, all those
expressions are very important to
understand so that you have enough tools
to build a logic, to build the
conditions that you can use inside your
statements. And with that, you can cover
many different scenarios and
requirements. So, now what we're going
to do, I decided to deep dive into first
the Boolean expressions in order to get
ourselves ready with anything once we
start building statements. So, let's go
first with the Boolean expressions. So,
now before we start with any operators,
we're going to cover the values and the
functions. Let's go.
Now, let's start with the basic stuff.
We consider the Boolean values as an
expression. So, we have two values, we
have the true and as well the false.
So now if you execute it, you will get
true and false in the output. And as we
learned before, be careful with that
capital T and the capital F. So those
are the two values. They represent like
an answer, yes or no. And of course you
can go and check the boolean data type
using the type function. So if you have
here like true and you go and execute
it, you will see the class boolean. All
right, so those are about the values.
Now we have as well functions that
returns true or false. Like for example,
the built-in bool function. It's going
to go and convert any value to a true or
false. So for example, let's have value
1 2 3 and let's print it. You can see we
are getting true. So now as you can see
in the output, you are getting true
because this function going to check
whether you have an empty value or you
have a real value. So now let's take
another example. For example, instead of
number, let's have string. So we have a
hi and if you go and execute it, you
will get as well true because we have a
value. It is not empty. So now let's go
and try something that's going to return
false. So boolean and now we're going to
leave it empty like this. So let's go
and execute it. Now as I can see, we are
getting false because it is empty. We
don't have a value. Now we can go and
check something else like bool and we
can go with the zero. Now in the output,
we are getting false. Now of course, the
zero is a value. It's not like an empty,
but in the boolean function, it's going
to be considered as nothing. So there is
no quantity. So for this function, it's
going to be considered as an empty. And
the same thing if you go and print and
then you have only double quotes. So we
have a blank, nothing inside it. If you
go and execute it, this going to be
false. So for this function, this is
empty. Now if you remember, we have a
special value called none. In Python,
this means there is no value at all. It
is unknown and doesn't belong to any
data type. So it's not a number, string,
boolean. It is the real nothing and it
is not equal of course to the empty
string because empty string is already a
string. But for the pool function, it's
going to be considered as an empty. Now,
of course, if you go and pass this value
to the pool and print it, you will see
in the output we will get as well false
because this considered to be nothing.
So, this is really nice function in
order to quickly check your values
whether they have a real value inside it
or it is an empty. And this function
going to return true or false. Okay, so
now let's move on. We have a lot of
functions that return true or false, and
we have two important built-in functions
called all and any. Let's understand
what this means. Now, let's say that we
have multiple values like for example,
we have zero, and as you understood,
zero in Boolean is false because the
size is empty, it is zero. Now, we have
another box, another value, and inside
it we have false. This is of course in
Boolean is false as well. And a third
value, and here we have string character
A. Now, since it is not empty, we have a
real value, the Boolean value of this
going to be true because it's not empty.
Now, as you can see, we have evaluated
those values separately. But now, what
we can do in Python, we can evaluate
them all together. And here in Python,
we have two options, either you use the
function all or any. So, now if you go
and use the built-in function any, it's
going to be happy if one of those boxes
is checked as true. So, if there is like
somewhere yes, then it is totally fine.
And in the output, you will get true.
But now, if you go and apply the
function all, this one is really greedy,
it's going to say, "I want everything to
be checked and marked as true." So, if
there is like somewhere false, you will
get false. That's why in this example,
you will get false. Let's have another
example where we have three values like
one, true, and A. So, now Python going
to go and evaluate them one by one, so
we're going to have here everywhere
true. So, now if you go and use the
function any, it's going to be more than
enough all what it ask for one true.
That's why you will get true in the
output. And now comes the greedy one,
all. This time, it's going to be happy
because everything is green and all
[clears throat] the values is true.
That's why you will get in the output
true. So, as you can see, those two
functions are really easy. So, now let's
go back in order to practice. All right.
Now, let's have a nice example where we
have three variables like email, phone,
and username. Let's go and assign for
them few values. For example, this is
going to be empty. And for the phone
number, we have some kind of this
number. And the username is going to be
empty. Now, as you might already know,
if you are registering to any websites,
they're going to require from you few
informations. And each website has their
own rule. Like for example, let's say
that we have a rule in our website. Say
we allow registration if one of those
informations are filled. So, we don't
need all three. It's enough to have one
to validate the registration. So, that
means we have to check all those three
variables whether we have informations
or not. And if there is like one of them
is filled, that is more than enough. So,
now since we want to check multiple
informations, we could use any or all.
And now, by looking to the task, it is
not restrictive. It's enough to have one
true in order to allow the registration.
That's why we're going to go with the
any. And here, we're going to build the
list. So, our list is email, phone, and
username. Now, in order to check the
result, you can go and print it. So,
let's go and execute. You can see this
is allowed because the phone here is
true. So, the email is false, username
is false, and the phone is true. And
that's more than enough for the any.
That's why we're getting true. Now, if
you go and remove the phone number and
execute, you will get false cuz you are
not fulfilling the minimum requirements.
It should at least has one true. Now,
let's say that you are building some
annoying website where we need all the
informations in the registration form.
So, you have to give everything, the
email, the phone, the username. And if
one of them is missing, it will not
allow the registration. So, that means
it is a must to have a true in all those
three parameters. And of course, for
that, we cannot use the any. We have to
go and use all. So, the same thing I'm
going to go and copy the whole thing
here and just replace the any with all.
So, let's go and execute it. Of course,
it's going to be false cuz our user
didn't provide anything. Now, let's go
ahead and give some informations.
So, now we have a number and we have a
user ID. But, let's say we didn't give
the email. So, let's go and execute it.
For the first website, we will get
through because we have more than
enough. We have like two informations.
But, for the annoying websites, it will
not work. You have to give all the
informations. All those stuff should be
true. So, that means in order to get
this true, you have to go and add here
website or like any value. We are not
validating the emails here. So, let's go
and execute it. Only then you will get
true. So, this is a very simple use case
why we need the any and all. And those
functions, we could use it as an
expression, of course, for our
conditions later. Okay, so now let's
keep going. We have another function
that returns false or true. And that is
the is instance. As you remember, we can
use it in order to check whether a value
belong to specific data type. Like, for
example, we can go and check whether the
123 is an integer. So, let's go and
print it. So, as you can see in the
output, we are getting true because 123
is an integer. And let's go and try
something else. Like, for example, I'm
going to say here true and I'm going to
check whether this value is a string.
So, let's go and execute it. You will
get false because true is actually a
boolean, not a string. So, as you can
see, this function checks the data type
and return true or false. And now for
the next one, of course, not only
functions, we could use methods from the
class string. Do you remember the one
that we used in order to search any
string? For example, the ends with. And
here we can go and search, for example,
for the O. Now, we can go and print it.
So, as you can see in the output, we are
getting true. That means this method
return true or false. The same thing for
the starts with. So, starts with. And if
you go and execute it, you will get
false because the string does not start
with the O. It starts with an H. All
right, so that's it so far about the
functions that could return boolean
value and you can use them as a boolean
expression. And [music] after that,
we're going to deep dive into the
operators. There are many different
important operators that you could use
as a boolean expressions, and we're
going to start with the first group, the
comparison operators. They are very
simple, but yet very powerful and used a
lot. [music]
We use the comparison operators in order
to compare two values and return true or
false based on the results. And here we
have many nice operators like the equal
to, where you have two equals, and then
the not equal, we have less than, less
than or equal, and the opposite, the
greater than, greater than or equal. So,
they are very simple, but now let's
understand exactly what do we mean with
the comparison operators. So, now how we
do it? Usually, we have two values, and
in between we put the comparison
operator. And this is like a question,
and the result of this going to be
either true or false, yes or no. So, for
example, we have two values, three and
two, and if you put operator between
them, the greater than, and with that we
are asking, is three greater than two?
So, Python going to return the boolean
value true. Now, of course, those are
direct values, numbers, but you could go
and compare not only values, you could
compare as well variables. Like, for
example, if you have a variable X, and
you assign for it like a value five, you
could compare now the variable with a
value, and you put in between them the
operator, for example, less. And with
that we are asking the question, is X
less than two? So, of course, Python
going to go and get the value five and
compare it with the two. Well, five is
not less than two, that's why Python
going to answer for this question as
false. So, as you can see, for those
questions, there is only true and false.
There is nothing like in between. And
what else we could put in this equation
is expressions. Like, for example, two
minus one. This is an expression, and
you can go and compare it to the value
two, and put in between, for example,
not equal. So, we are asking, is two
minus one not equal to two? Well, that
is true, cuz two minus one is one, and
one is not equal to two, and Python
going to say, yes, that's correct. And
what else we could put in this equation
is that we could use function. Like for
example, we could use the built-in
function length and we could say, "Okay,
is the length of hi is equal to three?"
Well, Python going to go first and
execute the function and we would get
two and then it's going to go and
compare, "Is two equal to three?" Well,
the answer for that is false. So, as you
can see, you can use anything as long as
it return a value and then you can go
and compare two values using the
comparison operators and this going to
form something called condition or it's
a question and the answer for those
questions is always true or false. So,
this is very simple. This is how it
works. Okay, so now let's go and try a
few operators. Like for example, you can
say, "10 is equal to 10." So, here you
have to go and use two equals. If you go
and execute it, you will get true. But
now if you go and use for example the
not equal operator between them and
execute it, you will get false because
10 is equal to 10. Now, another one we
can go and check whether the value is
greater than another value. So, if you
go and execute it, you will get true.
Seven is bigger than three. And the next
one, whether the seven is larger or
equal to another seven. If they are
equal like this, it's going to be fine
and even if it is like smaller, it's
going to be as well fine. You will get
true. So, here we have like two
operators in one. Now, the opposite
going to be, is three smaller than
seven? Well, you will get true. Or you
say, is three smaller or equal to seven?
So, it's a Again, we are checking two
things, less and equal. If you go and
execute it, you will get true. And as
well, if you have it like a seven, it's
going to be fine because seven is equal
to seven. So, again here we have two
things, either smaller or equal. Okay,
so now there is like few things I want
you to know about the comparison
operators and that you can go as well
and compare characters. Like for
example, is A smaller than B? So, if you
go and execute it, you will get true.
So, here Python is comparing the string
values alphabetically. And there is one
more thing. For example, if you are
comparing strings like this, so is A
equal to B? Well, it's false. Well,
Python here is comparing the strings
alphabetically. And what is very famous,
we can check the values using the equal.
So, is A equal to B? Well, false. And
there is one more thing, Python is case
sensitive. So, this will not be as well
accepted, it going to be false. So, a
lower A is not equal to an upper A. So,
that means not only numbers, you can go
and check as well string values. And
there is like one mistake that many
beginners do is that they don't use the
double equal. So, they make it like
this, you will get an error because the
one equal is for assignment as we
learned before. We can do it like this.
So, we want to assign for the variable X
a value like, for example, A. So, the
one equal is used to do assignment for
the variables, but the two equals is
used to check whether the two values are
equal or not. Now, there is like
something cool in Python, we call it the
chain comparison. So, so far what we
have learned is we could do like
comparison operator between two values,
right? So, this going to give you true.
But now, what we can do, we can go and
make a chain. Like, we can go and put a
third value like six, and then put an
comparison operator between the four and
six. So, with that we are doing like
chain comparison. So, now if you go and
execute it, you will get true. And now,
how Python did execute this? So, it
going to go and execute the chain from
the left moving to the right. So, first
it's going to go and execute this part.
Now, Python going to check if is one
smaller than four? Well, it is true.
Then, it going to go and check the
second part. Is four smaller than six?
Well, this is as well true. And now,
since everything is true, you will get
in the output true. But now, for
example, if you have here like five, and
you execute it, it will going to be
false because the first part is not
true, it is false. And it is not enough
to have like only one part as true, you
need everything to be true in order to
get in the output true. And now, think
of this, if you know SQL, this is like
the between operator. So, we are
actually checking whether this value
between two ranges. So, let's have a
nice example. Let's say that we want to
check whether the age between 18 and 30.
So, this sounds like a scale, of course.
Let's go and create a variable called
age, and we have the value 20. So, now
we're going to build it like this.
First, we have to check whether the age
is higher or equal to 18. So, we start
at the first boundary, and we say 18 is
less or equal to the age, the value that
we are checking, and at the same time
the age should be smaller or equal to
30. So, as you can see, we are checking
a value in between two other values. And
now, if you go and print it,
you will get true. So, yes, 20 is
between 18 and 30. And now, if you go to
one of the boundaries, like 18, it's
going to be fine, because here we have
greater or equal. But now, if you jump
outside the boundary, like for example
that 35, you will get false because it
is greater than 30. So, this part is
false, and this part is true. So, this
is how we do between, or let's say chain
comparison. And of course, you can go
and add as much comparison as you want,
but usually we don't use more than like
three values. Okay, so that's all about
the comparison operators. They are very
famous, and you're going to end up using
them like almost everywhere. And now, in
the [music] next one, we're going to
start talking about the logical
operators.
The logical operators and or, [music] we
use them in order to combine or connect
multiple boolean expressions in order to
build a logic or to build the rules. So,
let's understand exactly what this
means. Okay, so now let's say that we
have this condition. We are checking is
three smaller than five, and we want to
check at the same time another
condition, like is five equal to five.
So, that means, my friend, we are now
evaluating two conditions, not only one.
So, we have somehow to connect those two
conditions, so that Python evaluate both
of them. And here you have two options,
two logical operators, the and or. So,
now let's see how they work. Let's pick
the and. We use the and operator, then
you are telling Python return true if
both conditions are true. So, both of
them should be true in order to get at
the output true. So, now for example
here, the first condition is true, three
is smaller than five, and the second
condition is as well true, five is equal
to five. So, now Python going to say,
"Aha, we have the and operator. Both of
the conditions must be fulfilled in
order to get true, and that's why we are
getting in the output a true." But now
let's take another two conditions, like
we are saying, "Is the three greater
than five?" And the second condition is
five equal to five? Now Python going to
evaluate each condition separately. The
first one is not true, three is not
greater than five, and Python going to
go and evaluate the second condition,
and we will get a true. Now after that,
Python going to execute the and, but
this time it will not work, we will not
get true at the output because both of
the conditions are not true. We have one
false and one true. This is not enough
for the and operator, that's why we will
get in the output false. Now next let's
try to put an or in between. So, if you
use the or, you are telling for Python,
"At least one condition must be true."
So, it's enough to have one true in
order to get in the output true. So, now
for the first example, we have both as
true, it is more than enough, so we will
get in the output true. And now for the
second example, we have one false and
one true. Well, this time since we are
using or operator, it is enough. At
least we should have one true. That's
why in the output you will get true.
It's not like the and, the and is more
restrictive. And let's have another
example where we say, "Is three bigger
than five?" And the second condition is
five not equal to five? Now Python going
to go and evaluate both of the
conditions, and both of them going to
return false. And now it's going to
check the or operator, at least we need
one true. In this scenario, we don't
have anywhere true, that's why we will
get false. This is the only scenario
where you get false in the output if
both are returning false and you don't
have any true. So, it is very simple. If
you use the end operator, it going to
return true only if both of the
conditions are true. But, in the other
side, on the or operator, you will get
true if at least one of the conditions
is true. So, this is really amazing
operator in order to check multiple
things together so that you don't check
one thing at a time. Now, let's go and
practice. All right. Now, let's have a
little break. I would like to have a
reminder over here that don't just
consume a course. Don't just sit back
and watch me like coding and explaining
things. My recommendation here is really
20% consuming and 80% practicing. The
real learning can happen once you start
practicing coding and struggling. Don't
worry about making mistakes. That's
totally fine. So, practice more than
consuming and you will be fine. Now,
let's go back. [music] All right. Now,
let's start with a simple examples.
First, we are checking whether three is
higher than one.
And let's say that we have another one,
five is less than one. Now, we have like
two conditions I would like to go and
connect them. Let's say I'm going to go
with the and operator and then let's
have a print.
And let's go and check the results. Now,
as you can see, we are getting false
because the first part is true, but the
second part is not true. So, here we
have false and true, it will not fulfill
the condition. That's why we are getting
false. But, of course, if you go and
correct your conditions where you have
the five is
greater than one and you go and execute
it, you will get true. And that's
because both of the expressions are
returning true. Now, let's go and try
out the or operator for both of them.
So, here we can have an or and as well
here
or and I'm going to go and comment those
out. This as well. Let's go and execute
the first one. You will get true because
here we have in the first expression
true and the second one is false, but
all what we need is only one true. Now,
let's make both of them as false. So,
three is as well less than one. And you
go and execute it, you will get false
because you don't have any true. Both of
them is false. So, as you can see, it is
very simple, right? Okay, so now let's
have a real example in order to
understand when we use those stuff. Now,
let's say that you are building like
monitoring system to check whether our
system is under pressure. Like for
example, the memory or the CPU under
high usage. So, let's go and create two
variables, CPU usage and memory usage.
And now let's go and give values. For
example, here 70 and here we have the
memory usage is 95. So, now let's say
that if something above 90, it's going
to be critical. So, we're going to go
and check whether the CPU usage is
higher than 90. And as well we're going
to check the memory usage higher than
90. But now we have to go and connect
them. So, that means it's enough to have
one of those conditions as true to
trigger the alert. And now think about
it, which one we have to use? Should we
use and or should we use or? Well, since
I'm saying at least one of them is true,
we have to go and use the or operator.
Now, let's go and print
in the output and execute. So, you will
get true and that's because we have one
of those resources under high usage. So,
we have here 95. Now, let's say that it
is cooling down and we have it around
50%. And if you execute it, you will get
false. So, now that means everything is
fine and we don't have any alerts. So,
as you can see, we have here two
conditions and we are checking multiple
stuff in one go. All right, now let's
move to another real use case for the
end. And this everyone knows it. We're
going to check whether the user
credentials before logging. So, we
usually give an email and password and
we have to go now and check whether
everything is correct. So, now let's say
that we have a parameter called email
and a password.
And they are like boolean. So, let's say
here this is true, but the password is
false. Now, we have to check those two
informations. And of course, both of
them should be true in order to allow
the the to log in. So, that means we
have to check those two informations and
we going to connect them using the and
operator. Everything must be true in
order to allow the access. So, now let's
go and print this information and
execute. So, now as you can see in the
output we are getting false because the
password is not correct. But now let's
say that the user entered a correct
password. So, that we have the email and
the password as true. If you go and
execute it, you will get true. And of
course, if everything is false,
that means it is as well false. So, this
is as well a quick use case where we use
the and operator in order to check the
email and the password before login.
All right. Now we have the third logical
operator, the not. It doesn't combine
condition, but it flip the truth. It
reverse everything. It going to switch
the true to false and the false to true.
So, let's understand what this means.
Now, so far we have learned how to check
whether three is bigger than two. In
this scenario, you will get true. And if
you check is five equal to eight, that's
clearly going to give you false. So, so
far nothing surprising. Now, if you go
and just add the not operator just
before the expression, then it going to
switch the whole reality. So, the not
operator going to go to the results and
switch it. So, in this scenario we have
true and it going to go and switch it to
false. So, now the question is
completely different than before. Before
we have said is three greater than two,
but now we are saying is three not
greater than two. And of course, the
answer for this question going to be
false. Now, the same thing going to
happen for the second example. If you
add the not operator just before or the
check, it's going to go and switch the
false to true. So, this time the
question going to be is five not equal
to eight? Well, that is true. It's not
equal to eight. So, this is how the not
operator work. Now, let's go and
practice a little bit. Okay, so now
let's have a very simple comparison like
three is higher than two. And of course,
if you print the results,
you will get true because yes, three is
higher than two. But now if you go and
say not, so with that we are flipping
the whole thing and we will get false.
And you can put it wherever you want
before any Boolean value, like for
example, not true. So, what is not true?
It is actually false. The same thing if
you go and put not false and execute,
you will get true. Now, we're going to
have something funny. If you say not not
false. So, you can use it twice in order
to flip it twice. So, the not false
going to give you true and then not not
false, guess what? You will get false.
So, actually this is totally useless.
You can just remove it because it going
to gives you back the original value.
And one more thing about the not, let's
say that we have a variable called name
and you don't have anything inside it.
So, it's blank, only double quotes. And
now if you go and print it, you will get
as well nothing in the output. But if
you go and say not name, what going to
happen? You will get true. And as you
remember, the Boolean of empty is false.
And if you say not false, you will get
true. The same thing if you go and say,
for example, not zero, you will get as
well true because zero is false and not
going to flip it to true. So, [music]
that's it about the not.
Okay, so now with that we [music] have
learned how to combine two conditions
using the and or operators. Now, we're
going to go to the next level where
we're going to go and mix stuff together
and we're going to have like multiple
conditions in one line. So, now let's
say that we have multiple conditions
where we say is X equal to five? Another
one we are checking is Y greater than
five? And now we have a third one where
we are checking is Z smaller than four?
So, that means now we are evaluating
three conditions. And of course, if you
put them all in one line, go and connect
them using the logical operators. And
now here you have to be very careful
which one you are using because depend
on your design, you will get different
results. So, let's say that the first
operator going to be or and the second
one is and. And let's say that we are
getting the following values from those
variables, five, eight, and six. And now
if you go and execute it, it is very
important to understand the order of the
execution. So, here it is very important
to understand and operator has higher
priority than the or operator. So, that
means and will be executed before or.
So, that means Python going to focus on
the and operator and as well the
expressions on the left and on the
right. So, first it's going to evaluate
is 8 greater than 5? Well, it is true.
And then evaluate the right side. Is 6
smaller than 4? Well, it is false. Now,
after that, Python going to go and apply
the and operator. Now, since it is not
fulfilling the requirements, both of
them are not true, we have one false.
That means in the output you will get
false. So, this is the first part. And
now, the result of the and operator
going to be used together with the or
operator to get the final results. So,
now or operator has the second priority.
On the left side, we have 5 equal to 5.
Well, this is true. So, now Python has
everything in order to execute the or
operator. Well, it is fulfilling the
requirements. We have at least one true.
That's why in the output you will get
true. So, my friend, this is the default
execution order. By default, and has
higher priority than or. But, this is
not really nice because we are not
having the control of the execution. And
you say, "You know what? I would like to
have the or operator executed first
before the and." So, I would like to
have a control on the execution. Well,
in order to do that, we use the
parentheses. Now, if you go and put the
or operator with the conditions left and
right between parentheses, with that you
are telling Python, "Hey, don't go and
use the default priority. Now, I'm
designing the priority. First, go and
execute everything between my
parentheses, and then the result should
be evaluated with whatever outside my
parentheses." So, if you go and execute
it, it's going to work like this. First,
Python going to go and execute your
parentheses. So, what do you have inside
it? We have two conditions. Is 5 equal
to 5? Well, we have true. And the second
condition is as well true. Well, we have
more than enough for the or operator.
That's why we will get in the output
true. And now, only after that, Python
going to go and grab the and operator
and evaluate the part outside the
parentheses. So, is six less than four?
Well, no. That's why we will get false.
And now, Python has everything for the
and operator. So, here it is not
fulfilling the requirements. We have one
false, that's why in the output you will
get false. So, once you have more than
two conditions and you are using
multiple logical operators, you have to
be very careful designing your
condition. You have to do it step by
step and understand the order of the
execution. So, now let's go and practice
about this. So, now we have the
following task and it says, "Allow
access only if the user is logged in or
they are a guest, but they must not be
banned." So, imagine you are building
like an online store, you can allow the
user to buy things if they are a guest
or if they are logged in. And maybe you
have like some blacklist where you
banned people from buying things from
your website for some reason. So, now we
start by creating variables. Now, the
user could be logged in, so we could
have a variable like this, is logged in,
and the user could be a guest, so we
could have another variable, is guest,
and the user could be banned. So, this
is a third status about our user, is
banned. Now, in order to build this, we
have to check all those stuff. Let's
start one by one. So, we're going to
say, is logged in, this is the first
one, and as you can see in English, it's
really easy, or they are guests. So,
that means we are using the operator or,
and then is guest,
and then the last one, but they must not
be banned. Of course, we going to go and
use the is banned, but here we are
saying not banned. So, again, English,
yeah? Not is banned. But still, we
cannot use the not in order to connect
our operators together, that's why we
have to put in between [music] something
like and or. Now, of course, you cannot
cheat anymore, there is like no and or
in our logic, but actually, this is an
and. So, the user should be logged in or
a guest, but at the same time, the user
should not be banned. So, here we have
an and. Now, of course, we have to play
with the values. Let's go ahead and
print the whole thing and start adding
few values. Now, let's say that you are
logged in, but you are not a guest. So,
this is false. And let's say that you
are not banned. So, now if you execute
it, you will get true. So, now of
course, the question how Python did
execute it. First, the and operator has
more priority. So, this part can be
executed. What do we have here? Is guest
is false. Not is banned is true. So,
false and true going to be false. So,
this part going to give us false.
But the first part is true. So, is
logged in true? Now, that means true or
false, you will get true. Well, that is
really good. Now, let's go and try
something else where we say, "Actually,
you are banned. You managed somehow to
log in, but you are at the blacklist.
You are banned." Now, if you go and
execute it, you will get true. Hmm.
This is not working, right? So, what
happens here? First, the and operator
worked. So, here we have a false and not
is banned. So, here false and false,
you'll get false. And the first one is
true. So, that's why we are getting
still true. Well, the whole issue with
that the order of the execution is not
correct. I don't want to check those two
together. Actually, if you read it, we
have here two parts. This is the first
part. So, they belong together. Either
you are logged in or you are guest. So,
this is the first thing that has to be
checked. And then after that, we check
whether you are banned. So, that means I
would like to have this part first
executed, and that's why I'm going to go
and use the parenthesis at the left and
as well at the right. With that, we're
going to force uh Python to execute the
or operator first. So, now let's go and
execute it. You will get false. Now,
your logic is correct. That's why we
have always to test And to be very
careful with mixing or and and and
controlling the order of the execution.
So now, what happened here? Python going
to go and first execute the first part
of the or because we forced it to do
that. So here we have is logged in, you
are logged in, but you are not guest. We
have one true, so this going to return
true. And then Python going to go and
execute the second part. The second part
is false, you are banned. So we have now
true and false, that's why we are
getting now false. So as you can see, we
are getting completely different result
as we have controlled the execution of
our logic. And actually, it is not that
complicated, just follow the logic in
the text. And this is what we have
implemented step by step in our logic as
well. So first, this part going to be
executed and only after that we're going
to check whether the user is banned or
not. So now, I know that might be a
little bit complicated, but only if you
practice, you can understand how things
works.
Well, the in operator going to check
whether a value is inside another value.
It could be a string value, list, or any
sequence. So now, the syntax for that is
very easy. Where we say, for example, is
the character A exist inside the string
data. So we are using the in operator
between the two string. And if you read
it in English, it's very simple, is A in
data. So if you go and execute it,
Python going to take the A and start
searching inside the data for a match.
And it's going to find it in the second
character, that's why you will get in
the output true. So A is inside data.
Now sometimes what we can do, we want to
check whether it's not inside the data.
So we use the operator not just before
the in. So again, it's easy in English,
is A not in data? Well, it is false. So
the not operator going to go and switch
the reality of the output. Instead of
true, you will get false. Now let's have
another example where we have, for
example, barra. And then we're going to
check whether it is a member of a list.
Don't worry about the list, we're going
to learn about it later. So here we have
a list of different people, John, Kumar,
Ali. Now again, it is very simple. Is
Barra now member of this gang? Well,
Python can start searching and matching.
Barra is not a member of this group.
That's why we'll get false. And now, if
you go and add the not operator, it's
going to be like this. Is Barra not in
not a member of this list? Well, it is
true. He is not part of this group. So,
that's why the not operator going to go
and switch the output from false to
true. As you can see, Python is not that
hard, right? It is very friendly. So,
now let's go and practice a little bit.
Okay, so now let's go and do some easy
stuff, like for example, let's go and
search for the character O here
in the word Python.
So, let's go and execute it. You will
get true. And if you go and get like
character like F, is F in Python? Well,
it's false. And now, of course, we can
go and add here the not in. So, is F not
in Python? Well, that's true. So, it
flips the output. Same thing if you go
and make like a list. So, let's say that
you are checking whether the three is
member of this list. 1 2 3. So, if you
go and execute it, you will get true
because three is member of this list.
And if you say not member of this list,
you will get false. So, this is very
easy. Now, of course, the question is
how to use this in real use cases. Let's
say that again we have a website and we
are checking the registration. So, once
you give your email address, we can
easily check the domain whether it is
banned or not. You don't want to
register like bad domains, otherwise
you're going to get hacked. Let's say
that the domain that the user entered
like gmail.com. So, this one is safe.
Now, of course, we have to go and create
a list of different domains that are
banned or let's say blacklisted. So,
banned domains equal and here we make a
list. I know we are using a lot of list,
but we're going to learn that later. So,
let's say that we have domain called
spam.com, another one fake.org,
and the last one bots.net. So, now what
we want to do is to check whether the
domain that entered from the user is not
a blacklisted domain. So this is really
nice check. So domain not in the banned
domains. As you can see, it is very
simple and as well secure. Let's go and
execute it. Now as you can see, it is
true. So the domain that is provided
from the user is safe. Now let's say
that another user goes and enter a
domain spam.com. If you go and execute
it, you will get false. Well, this is
not allowed to register because this
domain is a membership of this bad
domains. So as you can see, those
expressions we use it in order to build
quality checks and as well security
checks. And this is nice one, right? So
that's all about the membership
operators. They are very friendly. Let's
move to the next group. We have the
identity operators. Again, here we have
only two, is and is not. They are not
that famous like the other groups, but
still we have to learn how to work with
it because we're going to use it in some
scenarios. So let's understand behind
the scenes what these operators do.
It going to check whether two variables
are referring to the same object in the
memory. So this sounds little bit
complicated. In order to understand it,
as usual, we're going to make sketch
about it. So let's see what this means.
So you remember on the left side we have
our code and on the right side Python
stores our variables in memory. So now
let's say in code you created a variable
called A and inside it you have a list 1
2 3. Now if you go and execute it,
Python going to go and create something
in the memory. So it's going to store
the variable and the values. Now let's
say that you created another variable
called B and as well you have the same
value 1 2 3, a list. So if you execute
it, the same thing going to happen.
Python going to go and store the data,
the values inside the memory. Now the
things are not exactly like this in the
memory. Actually, we don't have a direct
mapping between the variables names and
the values. The variables are actually
pointing to an ID, to an object ID. So
for the first value, it is stored with
the object ID 30, and for the second
value, we have another ID 40. So, by
looking to this, that means we have
variables, and the variables are
pointing to an objects, and each object
has an ID and value. So, that means we
are connecting the variables using
something called pointers. So, this
exactly how it looks in the memory, and
now let's go back to our code, and let's
say that you are checking is A equal to
B? Well, if you are using the equal
operator, you are comparing the values
of the two variables. So, Python going
to check the values, nothing else. And
as you can see, the values are equal,
that's why you will get in the output
true. But my friend, now if you use the
is operator, so you say A is B, so that
means we are saying is A has the same
identity as B? And if you do it like
this, then you are telling Python, go
and compare the IDs of the objects. This
time, we don't care at all about the
values, we care about the object ID. Are
the IDs equal? Well, if you look to
this, we have here two different IDs, 30
and 40, and they are not equal, that's
why you will get false. So, here my
friend, we are checking with the is
operator whether the two variables are
pointing to the same object in the
memory. We are not comparing the values.
If you want to compare the values, go
and use the equal operator. But wait,
wait, we are not done yet. Things get
more complicated. If you go and create
simple values in the memory, like you
say A is equal to five, and B is equal
to five. So, now if you go and execute
it, what going to happen? Python going
to check the values and say, "Okay, the
five is very simple value. I don't have
to go and create two different objects
for it. I can create one object, and
with that, I'm saving memory, and it is
really easy to handle." So, Python going
to create an object with the value five,
and as well, each object has an ID, like
for example, 98. And now what can
happen, since those two variables are
having the same value, it going to go
and point those two variables to the
same objects. So, that means we have two
variables, one ID and one value. Now, if
you check back our code, we have A is
equal to B. Well, here we are comparing
the values, you will get anyway true.
But, this time if you say is A the same
object as B, Python this time going to
go and check the ID and going to say
actually both of the variables are
pointing to the same objects. So, both
of the variables having the same ID, the
89. That's why this time you will get
true. [music] So, this is actually how
it works. If you have multiple variables
with a very simple values, Python going
to go and create one object for them and
all the variables going to be pointing
to the same objects. And if you use the
is operator, you will get true. But, if
you have complex values, Python going to
go and store them in different objects.
And if you use the is operator, you will
get false. So, I hope this is clear and
now we're going to go and practice.
Okay, so now let's have a very simple
example where we create a list of
characters like A
and then B
and C. And now we're going to go and
copy the whole thing, but we store it
now in different variable. Now, my
friend, if you go and say is X equal
equal Y
and then print this in the output
you will get true. Yes, we are comparing
the values and this is completely true.
But, now if you say and use the is
operator between those two variables
you will get false because Python going
to go and create for each value a
separate object and they have separate
IDs. So, here we are comparing the IDs
using the is operator and the equal
equal going to compare the values. Now,
if you go and copy the whole thing and
use an easy value like 10 and here 10,
then let's go and execute, you will get
true and true because Python going to go
and optimize it and put those two
variables or the values of the variables
in one objects. [music] So, they're
going to have the same ID and as well
the same value. That's why you are
getting for both true. Okay, so now
there is one more thing about the
assignments. Let's say that we are
saying X is equal to this list. But now
for Y, we don't repeat the same thing.
We say simply Y going to be equal to
whatever value X has. Now, what can
happen? Python will not go and create
for the Y new objects. All what it going
to do, it going to go and point it to
the same object for the X. So, you going
to have again those two variables
pointing to the same objects. If you go
and execute it, you will get true and
true this time because for the Y, Python
is not creating new objects. Now, I was
thinking about when we going to use this
in projects. Let's say that we have the
following example. We are doing some
data quality where we are checking
whether the email exists and it is not
empty. So, let's say that we have an
email and now we have to check whether
the user gave any email address. Like
for example, let's say the user didn't
enter anything like blank. And now we
can go and check something like this
where we say that email should not be
blank. So, this is our rule and if you
go and print this, so you will get
false. This is not allowed. This should
not be the case. But now if you go and
give any value, any email and execute
it, you will get true. So, this is okay.
But now sometimes in Python, it could be
like this, none. So, the user did not
give anything. And of course, this is
different than the blank. This is
nothing. Now, if you go and execute it,
so now as you can see, we are getting
true. This is naturally good because we
don't have actually an email. This is
nothing and in Python, none is not equal
to blank. That's why this is not enough.
We have to go and build another
condition. is not equal to none like
this.
And of course, we have to go and connect
those two conditions. So, what we going
to do, we going to go and use the end
operator. So, if you go and execute it,
you will get false because this
condition here is false and this one
here is true. So, true and false, you
will get false. Now, you might say,
"Okay, but what has this to do with the
is operator?" Well, there is like
special use case for the none operator
where you going to see that developers
in codes, they never use the not equal
or the equal operator with the none.
They always use the is operator. So, in
this case, for example, they say the
email is not none. Well, you might ask,
but the not equal and the equal works.
You are totally correct. This works, but
this is like best practices. It is
better to use the is or the is not with
the special value none. Well, the reason
behind that, it is a little bit
complicated. We'll not deep dive into
that. Well, what I think about it, it's
just from SQL because in SQL you are not
allowed to use the equal operator with
the nulls, and the developers are used
to use is and is not with the null
operator, and they brought it here to
Python. So, if they are dealing with a
null or let's say here none, they don't
use the operator equal, they use the is
operator. And to be honest, I do this
mistake a lot. I say is not null, not
none, because I'm used to SQL, and
that's why you will find a lot of
developers use the is none and the is
not none. But if you go and use the
equal, your code can work. So, that's it
about the is operator.
>> [music]
>> Well, if you think that you are done
here, you are totally wrong because now
it's time to challenge you. And this
time it will not be easy. I have for you
five challenges. The first challenge,
check if a username is not empty and the
age is greater than or equal to 18. I
know this is an easy one. Let's move to
the second one. Check if the password is
at least eight characters long and does
not contain spaces. Mhm, so, it is
interesting here. The third one, check
if a user's email is not empty, contains
ads, and ends with .com. Okay. The
fourth one, check if a username is a
string, is not none, and is longer than
five characters. So, this time we are
validating the username. And now we come
to the final boss, to the advanced
challenge. Check if the user is either
an admin or moderator, and at the same
time check either they are not banned or
they have verified their email. So, a
lot of things is going on here. Pause
the video and then go solve those tasks.
All right, friends. Now, by looking back
to our road map, all that we have
completed the first chapter on how to
control the execution in Python. So, you
know how to build logical expressions.
But, logic alone does nothing unless you
use it. That's why we have the next
chapter where you going to learn how to
make your program use the logic and make
decisions based on it. So, we going to
learn now the conditional statements.
Let's dive in.
Okay, so now, what is conditional
statements? It is very simple. It is
like a checkpoint in your code that's
going to check a condition. If the
condition is true, it going to run
special block of code. But, if the
condition is false, it will skip it. So,
it's like you are making a decision
inside your code. So, we have only those
two options. Either we're going to run
the code or not. Think about it like the
traffic light. If it is red, you stop.
If it is green, you go. So, the rule is
very simple and this is exactly what we
can do in coding. Normally, our code
it's like straight line from start to
end. But, with the conditional
statements, we can make like a question
or a checkpoint. And based on the
answer, if it is true, then you go to
the right and do something. But, if it
is false, then you go to the left and do
something else. So, that we can cover
multiple scenarios and based on the
data, we go either left or right. So,
now my friends, there are like multiple
forms of the conditional statements and
we're going to start with the basic
form, with the easiest one and then
we're going to do it step by step until
we reach the advanced one. So, let's get
started. [music] A little bit story
about this. I know some of you are
wondering about whether this coffee is
fake or not. Well, I can tell you this
is completely true. This is hot coffee.
Now, another fact is this is not
sponsored by Nescafé or something. I
just had the cup in my desk and it
became the brand of Data with Baro. And
even there's like some company contacted
me whether I can use their coffee at my
desk as sponsors, but we didn't came to
a deal at the end. So, no, this is not
fake and I don't drink Nescafé. I drink
actually cappuccino using espresso
machine. I hope with this everything is
clear and now let's go back.
Okay, so now let's start with the first
level, the most basic form of the
conditional statement, the if
statements, where we have only one
single condition. So, the if statement
is where everything starts. We use it in
order to define the first condition, the
first question. Now, in order to
understand how things works, we going to
have a visual charts. So, let's check
this. All right, now we always start at
the top where our program begins and
then we say we want to build now a
question where we use inside it a
Boolean expression in order to have a
condition. So, it is like a question and
the answer for that is going to be
either true or false. So, either yes or
no. Now, if the condition is true, we
going to have like a piece of code that
going to assign the value A. So, that
means Python has to do something if the
answer is true, but if the other side if
the answer is false, Python has to do
nothing, completely skip everything and
jump to the end. Now, in order to build
this kind of question or checkpoints, we
use the conditional statement if. So,
this is the most basic form of the
conditional statements where we say if
the condition is true, then run the
code, but if the condition is not true,
then skip it. So, now let's have an
example in order to see how Python can
execute it. Let's say that we are
evaluating the scores of the students
and we want to give them grades. So, we
can go and build a question or condition
like this. If the score of the student
is greater or equal to 90, then this
student going to get the grade of A.
Okay, so now let's have this example
where we have a very good student with a
score of 100. So, now Python going to go
and check it. Is 100 greater or equal to
90? Well, the answer for that is yes,
it's true. So, now what can happen?
Python going to go and take the right
path and execute it. So, we're going to
go to that code block where we assign
the grade to A. And after that, Python
going to jump out immediately to the
end. Now, let's have another student
with a score of 80. So, now Python going
to go to the checkpoint and compare the
values. Well, this time it is not
fulfilling the condition because 80 is
not greater or equal to 90. So, it's
going to fail and Python has to go to
the false path. So, that means this time
Python didn't execute the block of code.
We skipped it and actually nothing
happened here. So, that's it. This is
how the single if statement works. So,
all what you're saying, if this is true,
then do something. If not, just skip it.
It is very simple, right? So, now in
Python we have always to understand the
rules of using something. So, now let's
say that we have like two blocks of
codes and in between we put our if
statements. The rules are here that we
can use only one if statements for each
chain. So, we cannot go and add multiple
if statements. It's only one. The second
rule, it must always come first. So, the
first thing that we do is to define the
if statements. We will understand this
later as we progress. And it is
required, it is not optional. So, if
you're building conditional statements,
you must always include if. You cannot
skip it. And it can stand alone. So, you
can have only if statement like this
without any other statements. Okay, so
now let's go and create a variable like
the scores and add to it a value 100.
Now, in my code I would like to go and
ask a question about this value and
based on the results, Python has to do
something. So, in order to do that, we
use the conditional statement if. And
after that, we have to add the condition
or let's say the Boolean expression. So,
we're going to say if the score is
greater or equal to 90, then Python has
to do something. So far, what do we
have? We have the Boolean expression, we
have the if statements, and after that,
we have to do an action if this is true.
Now, in order to do that, we have to go
and add the double points. This is
something a lot of beginners forget to
add. Just don't forget your double
points after the condition, and after
that, go and hit enter. Now, we're going
to write what Python has to do if the
condition is true. So, I'm going to say,
go and print A. And now, you might say,
wait, the format is really ugly. Why do
we have like spaces at the start? So,
let's go and remove them. And
immediately, we'll see everything is
red, and there is like something is
wrong. Well, it's because, my friends,
you cannot do that. You have to go and
put spaces before the print. And those
two spaces at the start, we call them
indentations. They are, my friend, part
of the syntax in Python. So, that means,
my friend, you have to be pixel-perfect
in order to do those stuff in Python.
So, let me explain for you what are
those.
The indentation means that you add
spaces or tab at the start of a line, so
that you help Python to understand which
lines belongs together. So, now, if
you're looking to the second line to the
print, you see it is like pushed to the
right side using four spaces. And with
that, Python going to understand the
second line actually belongs to the
first line. So, that means Python cannot
go and immediately like print the A. It
has to consider first the if statements.
If everything is fine, Python can go and
print the A. And the same thing if you
have like a second print, let's say
great job. So, that means both lines of
the print are intended under the if. So,
they're going to run only if the
condition is true. And if you don't do
that, you will get an error. And the
indentation is not something special
only for the conditional statement if.
It is how Python defines the blocks of
code. So, you have to use it as well for
the other stuff, like defining a
function or using the for loop. You can
see in all those scenarios, we have to
add the indentations in order to make it
clear for Python which code belong to
which one. So, with that we can see that
print A belongs to the if statements,
and print hello with the name, it
belongs to the definition of the
function, and the print loop with the I,
it belongs to the for loop. So, you have
to do this in different scenarios. And
as well, in Python we can nest stuff
inside each others. So, for example,
here we are defining a function, and
after it we have the conditional
statements. So, with that we have three
levels. The top level is without any
indentations or spaces, where we have
the definition of the function, the
second level. Then after that, we have
the first level inside of the function,
we have the if else. And then inside the
if and inside the else, we have a second
level, where we have the prints. And
again, we can organize this using
spaces, so you have to be pixel perfect
here. So, if you look to this as blocks,
the whole if belongs to the definition
of the function, as well the else. So,
both of them are the same level. And the
first print, it actually belongs to the
if statements. And the second print
belongs to the else statements. So, each
time you add four spaces or
indentations, you are introducing a new
level of nesting. And if you know any
other languages like Java, JavaScript,
there as well we have if else
statements, but we use there brackets in
order to mark the start and the end of a
block. So, in Java and JavaScript, there
are no rules about the indentations,
it's only styling. But the indentations
in Python, it is part of the rule and
the syntax. Of course, if you compare
now Python with the other languages, you
can see it is easier to read with the
Python. We don't have to go and add the
brackets, the space is going to control
the structure of our code. But still,
you have to be careful as you are adding
spaces to your code that has a meaning
for the interpreter of Python. Okay, now
we are back. Now, as you can see, we
have here only two spaces. But if you
are following the standards of styling
in Python, the PEP 8, you have to add
four spaces or a tab. So, I really
recommend you to follow this rule from
now on. We add four spaces. So, now
either you go here and add like two
spaces in your Visual Codes, or you can
configure the Visual Studio in order to
add always four spaces automatically.
So, now in order to do this, we have to
go to the commands, control shift P, and
then go and search for something called
preferences, open user settings JSON.
So, this one over here. And now don't
panic, we're going to get like the
settings in JSON formats. Of course,
things might look different at your
side, but what you going to do, let's go
to the ends, just add here at the ends
like comma, and then we have to place
this piece of code. So, now we are
saying here only for Python go and add
four spaces for the indentations. So,
now after that, go and save it, and then
restart the Visual Studio Code. So, now
if you go back to your code, I remove
this, we go back to the double points,
if you go and hit enter, you will get
your four spaces immediately, and with
that you're following the best
practices. Now, we can go and say print
A. Okay, so that's all about the
indentations. Now, let's focus on the
conditional statements. So, again, this
code belongs to the if statements and
going to be executed only if this
condition is true. So, now let's go and
try this out. You can see we are getting
A because the score is higher than or
equal to the 90, but now if you go and
make something 50 and execute it, so as
you can see we don't have anything in
the output, there is no print because
the condition is not fulfilled. It is
false, and with that Python is ignoring
totally this line. So, it's like we are
locking at this line of code, Python
going to access it only if the condition
is true. So, it is very simple, that's
all.
Okay, so now let's move to the next
form. We have the two-way decision using
else statements. The else statements
runs a block of code if the answer of
the condition is false. So, that means
we can use it in order to do something
if all the conditions are not fulfilled.
Let's have a simple visuals in order to
understand it. All right, now by looking
to this again, you can see that for the
false path, we are not doing anything.
So, only things going to happen if the
answer is true. Now, what we can do, we
can go and add a block of code to be
executed on the false path. For example,
we can go and assign the grade if if the
answer is false. So, now in order to do
that, we have to use the conditional
statement else in order to have it on
the false path. So, now again, let's
have this example. The student has a
score of 100. So, Python going to go and
ask, "Is 100 greater or equal to 90?"
Well, the answer for that is true and
Python going to go to the right side and
going to go and assign the A grade for
the student. And after that, jumps to
the end. But now, if the student has the
score of 80, Python going to go and
check it and it going to fail the
condition. So, now this time we don't
have only if, we have now an else. So,
Python will not go immediately and jump
to the end. Python first has to do
something in the false path. So, it
going to go and execute the block of the
else statement by assigning the grade to
F and then jump out to the end of the
chain. So, now if you look at this, we
have now two-way decision. All what we
are saying here, if this is true, do
this, else do that instead. And by the
way, very important to understand, there
will be no scenario where we going to go
and execute both of the codes. So,
either left or right. So, with this, we
have now more options to our code. Okay,
so now let's check the rules for the
else statements. Well, first, it must
come at the end. It is always the last
thing that can happen inside our chain.
And it's very important, it does not
contain any conditions. So, it's not
like the if or the else if statements.
So, nothing to be checked. It is
optional, so you can go and skip it. You
don't have always to have an else. But
in the other side, it cannot stand
alone. It always needs an if. So, it
makes no sense to have only else. And
the last one, you cannot have a multiple
else statements in the same chain. So,
it's like the if, you can use only one
else. So, of course, we can understand
this as we practice. Okay, back to our
same example. So, as you can see, we are
not getting anything here because we are
not fulfilling the condition and nothing
going to happen. Now, if you go and add
an else, it is very important that you
have to add it at the same level as the
if. So, without any indentations. So,
here we have to go and add as well
double points. But, as you can see,
between the else and the double points,
we don't have any condition. Now, we can
do the same thing. We can hit enter and
again we have our four spaces because
this block of code belongs to the else.
So, print if. And actually, that's it.
So, now let's go and execute it. So, we
can see we are getting if at the output
and that's because we are not fulfilling
the condition. So, that means Python is
not executing this print. Python has to
jump to the else statements and execute
the second print. But, now if you go and
fulfill the condition, let's say we have
95 and execute. And with that, you are
getting A and that's because we are
fulfilling the condition and Python is
executing its print. And of course,
since this worked, Python going to
ignore completely the else statements
here. Python will not do anything about
this section. So, again, about the
rules, you cannot have the else
statement as like stand-alone. If you go
and execute it, you'll get an error. So,
else always needs an if statement at the
start. And of course, it is optional.
So, if you remove it, your code going to
work. So, it is not must. You don't have
always to go and include an else. And it
has always to be at the end of your
block. You cannot go and switch it like
to have else and then if. You will get
errors. So, first if and then else. You
have to follow the orders, my friend.
And of course, you cannot go and add any
condition after the else. You will get
an error. So, else and then afterward
immediately the double points. As you
can see, it is very easy.
Okay, friends. And [music] now, let's
keep moving. Let's keep adding stuff.
Now, we're going to talk about the
multi-condition statements using LF
statements. The LF statement, it is
short of else if. We use it in order to
add a new follow-up question if the
result of the previous question was
false. Now, as usual, in order to
understand what this means, we're going
to have a visual charts. Now look at
this again. We have only one question
and two ways. But of course, in real
projects, things get more complicated
and you have to ask more than one
question. But now the big
[clears throat] design decision is where
we're going to put this condition. So
when we can ask this question? Well, we
have four options for different
scenarios. The first one, we can take
this question and put it on the left
side. So if the answer for the first
question is false, we ask a follow-up
question. And in order to do that, we
have dedicated conditional statement
called else if. Or you say, "You know
what? Let's move this question to the
right side." So if I get a true from the
first question, I want to ask a
follow-up question. Well, for that, we
don't have like special conditional
statements. We have to reuse the if
statements. And with that, we are
building something called nested if. Now
to the third option, what we can do with
that, we can ask this question together
with the first question. And if you
remember in the Boolean expression, if
you want to connect two conditional
statements, we have to use the logical
operators and or. So this is something
that could happen a lot. Now if you look
to this, you can see that we are moving
this condition like inside our chain.
But what we can do, we can ask
completely outside of this chain. So
after the first chain is completely
done, we go and ask our second question.
So completely outside. And we call this
independent ifs. We can learn about that
later. So now let's start with the first
one. We're going to put our question on
the left side. So after we get false
from the first question, we're going to
ask the follow-up question using the
else if. Now let's say that we're going
to add another check where we are
asking, "Is the score of the student is
equal or greater than 80. And of course,
each question, each condition has two
ways. So, if it is true, we have to do
something. If it's not, we have to do
another thing. Now, in this example, if
it's true, then let's say we assign the
grade B. And if it is false, then we go
to the else statement. Now, as you can
see, we are extending our chain and we
are adding more scenarios. Let's have an
example. If the student has the score
100, so Python going to ask the first
question, is 100 greater or equal to 90?
Well, yes. It is true. That's why Python
going to go to the right side and
execute the block where the grade is
equal to A. And after that, it's very
important, it's going to jump
immediately out of the chain. So, it
going to go immediately to the end and
everything on the left side going to be
ignored. So, that means we are not
asking the second question. And this is
exactly how things works with the
conditional statements. Once you get the
first true, the code that belongs to it
going to be executed and then go out.
So, nothing else, no other questions
going to be asked. Now, let's have
another score. We have 85. So, Python
going to go to the first condition. It
going to fail because it is less than
90. And now Python has to go and ask the
second question. Is 85 greater or equal
to 80? Well, it is true. And now Python
going to go to the right side and assign
B to the student. And as well, it going
to go immediately to the end. Now, let's
have another score, the 50. So, it's
going to fail the first question because
it is less than 90. So, we go to the
left. And now we ask the second
question. Well, it going to fail as
well. It is less than 80. That's why
Python going to go to the false path and
execute the else. So, our student going
to get F at the end. So, now by looking
to this, our code has three ways, three
scenarios. The one where the first
question is true, another one where the
first question is false, but the second
is true, and the last one where
everything is false. None of the
condition is met and the else is
executed. And now it looks really nice.
If you compare the conditional
statements, you can see if and else if.
Both of them has question has condition,
but with the else we don't have here any
question, any condition. It's something
that has to be done. And as well you can
see with the else, it's like a fallback,
a backup. If none of the above is true,
then we have to execute the else. So it
is the fallback scenario and we use it
in order to give default values. Okay,
so now what are the rules for the else
if? So the first rule is about the
position. It comes always after the if
statements. So you cannot have it before
it. Well, the second thing is not a
rule, it's something nice. You can use
as many else if blocks as you want. So
you can use one, two, three, as much as
you want. And the else if always needs
as well condition. It's like the if
statements. And as well of course it is
optional. So you don't have always to
include it. So it is similar to the else
and as well it cannot stand alone. So
you cannot have an else if without an if
statements. So those are the rules of
course we have to practice. Okay, so now
let's go and add our if. Now you can see
here we have like two blocks, the if and
the else. In order to add else if you
have to add it in between. So you cannot
add it at the start or at the end you'll
get an errors. So that's why we're going
to go over here and say else if and
afterward we have to go and add our
condition exactly like the if
statements. So we're going to say the
score is greater or equal to 80. So this
is the condition and if it is true, so
we have to go and add the double points.
Don't forget about it. And then we hit
enter and as you can see we are getting
our indentations. So what can happen?
We're going to go and print the grade B.
And actually that's it. With that we
have now our two questions and we can
try this out. So let's have the 100. You
can see we are getting A. So Python is
executing this print and everything else
is ignored because the first condition
is fulfilled. Let's go and try the 85
and execute it. You You see we are
getting the B. And that's because the
first condition did fail. That's why
Python going to try the second
condition, and the second one with the
else if it is true. That's why we are
getting B. So, that means the else if
now is activated. Let's go on and the
last one, the 50, and execute. You will
see we are getting the grade F, and
that's because this value did not
fulfill any of our conditions. So, that
means we got false in all our
conditions. That's why Python did
execute the else statements. So, as you
can see, it's really simple to read. If
this condition is true, then do this.
Otherwise, go check another thing. If
this is true, then do that. And if none
of the above is working, just go to the
else statements and execute this. So, it
makes sense and as [music] well simple.
All right. Now, moving on to the next
one, we can make branching on the
conditional statements. We don't have
for this like a new keyword or
statements. It's all about using the
else if multiple times. So, let's
understand what this means. Now, all
what we're going to do is to add another
follow-up question. For example, is the
score is higher or equal to 70? And
we're going to do the same thing. We're
going to put it on the false path. So,
if the answer for the second question is
false, go and ask third question. And
the same thing, either it's going to be
true or false. If it's true, then we add
and assign the grade of C. And if it's
false, then we go to the else. So, as
you can see, all what we are doing is we
are asking another question if you are
getting false. So, by looking to this,
you can see we can connect else if with
another else if. Well, this is really
[snorts] useful in many scenarios where,
for example, we are building this
grading system or we are assigning roles
to the users or maybe we are working
with the codes of status. There are many
scenarios where we have to chain the
different conditions using the else if.
So, for example, if the score is 100,
the first condition is true. So, with
that, Python going to go to the right
side, assign the A, and skip then
everything. Jump immediately to the end.
All the questions, everything on the
left side going to be ignored. So now if
you have the score of the 85, the first
condition is false, then Python going to
go and ask the second question. It will
be true and with that we will get B and
immediately break the chain. So get out
to the end. Now let's say the score is
70, the first condition is false, the
second as well false and now Python has
to ask the last question. Is it equal or
higher than 70? Well, yes. So that's
means it going to go to the path of the
true and assign C without executing the
else. And to the last example where we
have 40. So the first question is false,
the second as well false and now Python
going to try the last question. Is it
higher or equal to 70? Well, this is as
well false. That's why nothing left and
Python has to go and execute the else
because we didn't get any true to all
our conditions. So with that Python
going to assign F and jump out to the
end. As you can see, we are covering
four scenarios, four ways. But as we are
using more else if, we are like
branching to the left side. So visually
it looks like you have steps going down
or like waterfall. So you see coding is
not that dry, right? We have like a
visual behind the code. There is always
like a design. So now let's keep going.
We going to go and add another block of
the else if. So else if score is greater
or equal to 70, then double points. If
this is true, what going to happen? We
hit enter and print
C.
So now let's try this out and we going
to get the value 75 and execute it. You
are getting now C. So what happens here?
The first condition is not true, that's
why Python is jumping to the second one.
As well, this condition is not true,
that's why it going to go and try the
last one. This time the score 75 is
greater than 70, that's why we are
getting the C. But of course if you go
and do something below like 50, none of
the conditions is fulfilled, that's why
Python is executing the else statements.
As you can see now you can go and keep
adding stuff to our code like for
example if it is like 60 or above then
let's go and print D. So as you can see
we are like chaining the else if. This
is how things works with both three
conditions. So things are easy right?
Okay now we going to talk about the
nested if form. So the nested if is all
about to put if statement inside another
if statement. Now as usual we going to
have a visual to understand it. Okay so
now let's say that we have a question
and as you can see we used to add the
questions always to the left side with
the false path where we use the else if.
But now how about to add our follow up
question after the true. So we go to the
right side and we ask it immediately
after the true. Well for that we don't
have dedicated statements like the else
if. We have to go and reuse the if
statements. And with that we have like
an if statement inside another one.
That's why we call it nested if. So now
what going to happen we have to ask
another question for example has the
student submitted any projects? And for
this question we have either yes or no
true or false. If it's true then this is
really an excellent student and he or
she going to get A+. But now if it is
false this student still good so we
still have like above 90. That's why we
will get A. But for that to happen we
have to do exactly like the first if. We
have to include an else for it. So this
get little bit confusing. Each if
statements has its own else statements.
So the one that we have in the left on
the bottom it belongs to the first if.
But the one with the A it belongs only
to the second if statement to the nested
one. So again each time you start a new
if statement you can add to it an else.
So now let's have an example. Let's say
that student has 100 and as well he
submitted a project. So we have true. So
now python going to start with the first
question is it higher than 90? Well it
is true. That's why Python going to go
to the right side and then ask the
second follow-up question. Has the
student submitted any project? Well, it
is yes. Then it's going to go to the
right side and the student going to get
a perfect A+. And Python going to go and
break everything and go to the end. But
now let's say that our student didn't
submit any projects. So, for the first
question we have true. But as Python
going to ask the follow-up question
about the project, well, this time going
to get false and Python has to go and
execute the else of the second if
statements. So, this student going to
get an A and as well jump to the end.
And of course, the if the first
condition is not met, then Python has
always to go to the left side and ask
the follow-up question like before. And
with that we can see we are covering now
five different ways and we are branching
differently in the left side and on the
right side. So, we are forming something
like a tree, right? We have branches on
the left and as well to the right. And
there is one thing that you have to be
careful with that with the conditional
statement there is only one path going
to be executed. So, with this, my
friend, you have like now full control
on building complex and flexible logic
inside your code. Okay, so now back to
our code. Let's go and create a new
variable submitted projects.
And let's assign to it the value true.
So, this is a Boolean value and we can
go and ask a question about it inside
our chain. Give an A+ if the student
submitted as well the projects. And we
can go and ask this question inside the
first block. So, if the score is equal
or higher than 90, then go and ask
another question. And another question
means we need another if statement. So,
if the submitted projects, now we don't
have to go and add any cooperators. We
will not do something like this cuz it
makes no sense. It's enough to say if
submitted project like this. So, if this
returns a true, then do something about
it. As you can see, we don't have always
to use the comparison operators. It's
enough to use a Boolean expression.
Anything that you have learned before,
it could be function, it could be like
Boolean value, anything that returns
true or false could be used after the if
statements. So now, if the second
question as well true, what going to
happen? We going to go and hit enter.
Now, as you can see, the indentations
are eight spaces. So that Python knows,
whatever now I'm writing here, it
belongs to the previous question. So,
this print actually belongs to this if
statements and it doesn't belong to the
first one, right? Now, if both are true,
our student going to get A+ and
otherwise, so we have here an else, as
you can see, then you go and print A.
But here we have an issue. This print
now belongs to the else statements and
you have to go and give it a tab. So we
need here eight spaces in order for
Python to understand, aha, this one
belongs to this else and not to the
previous one. So as you can see, the
indentations are really important as you
are building such kinds of logic. If you
do it wrong, then you will get errors.
Now, let's go and try this out. For
example, let's have like 95 and the
project is submitted. If you go and
execute it, you will get the A+ and
that's because here the first condition
is fulfilled and as well the second
condition, that's why Python going to go
and execute the A+ and then jump outside
the whole code. So nothing else going to
be evaluated at all. But if we have here
like false and execute it, Python going
to evaluate this one, it's going to be
true and go inside. So now for the
second one, this one is false, that's
why Python has to go and implement the
else statements and that means only this
code is activated. Now, if you go and
add this true here and let's say we
have, for example, 50 and you go and
execute it, you will get an F because in
our logic, it doesn't matter now whether
you have a true or false.
This is actually only relevant for the
first block. We are not asking this
question afterward in the else if or the
else. We are just checking the scores.
So in this example, none of our
conditions are fulfilled. That's why
Python is printing if. So, my friend, as
you can see, we are nesting an if
statement inside another if statement.
And of course, you can keep nesting
stuff. Like I can go over here and say
if, like I don't know, if true, and then
double point, and then hit enter. So, as
you can see, we have an if inside
another if inside another if. And with
that, you can do nesting in Python. But
of course, we don't want to do that
here. So, that's it. This is how we do
the nesting.
Okay, again, the same scenario. We have
a new condition, and it's always the
question where to place it. Previously,
we have learned how to put it as a
follow-up question on the left side
using the else if, and as well how to
put it on the right side using a new if
statement. But now, we don't have always
to have it as a follow-up condition. We
can ask it at the same time with the
first condition. So, we're going to put
them together at the same level. And
with that, we have to evaluate two
conditions at the same time. But you
know, we have to connect those two
conditions using the logical operators
and or. And of course, both of them has
different behaviors. Like for example,
the and operator, it's going to return
true only if both of the conditions are
true. So, for example, if the first
condition is true and the second one as
well true, then this going to be fine
for the and operator. And Python has to
go to the right side to the true path
and assign A and then go to the end. But
now, let's see that the first condition
is true, but the second one is false.
So, the student didn't submit any This
is not okay for the end operator. It
expect both of the conditions to be
true. So, that's why Python going to go
to the left side and execute the else
statements. So, the student going to
fail. But now, of course, [snorts] this
makes no sense. This is really
restrictive. Instead, we can go and use
the or operator. And here, at least one
of the conditions should be true in
order to get at the result true. So, now
if you go and do it like this, the
condition is fulfilled because we have
one condition as true, and Python going
to go to the right side instead and
assign A to the grade. So now you have
understanding why we have learned the
Boolean expressions and the logical
operators exactly to build this kind of
logic. Okay, so now back to our example
and now let's focus on this part of
code. Now using the nested if statement
it is usually hard to maintain and as
well hard to read. And all what you are
doing here is we are checking two
conditions, the score and as well the
submitted projects. Now instead of
having it like this we could do
everything in one go. We can go and take
this over here and put it side by side
with the first condition. So with that
we can go and evaluate both of them, but
of course we have to connect them using
the logical operators. Now we're going
to say it like this, if the score is
higher or equal to 90 and as well the
project is submitted then this student
should get A+. So we can go get rid of
this nested if and we don't need those
eight spaces, we can go back. So if this
happens the student going to get an A+,
but now what we're going to do with this
one here? We still need the A, right?
But now we have to do something about
this over here. We cannot have two else,
right? We have now only one if and you
are allowed only to use one else. And of
course you want to use the last one,
that's why we have to go and remove
this. Now what we can do, we can go and
use else if and we have to specify the
condition. So we're going to say again,
if the score is higher or equal to 90
and after that double points and of
course here what going to happen, we're
going to print the A, but we don't need
eight spaces, it's enough four. So that
we have everything at the same level.
Now you might say why we are not
checking again the submitted projects.
So why we are not doing something like
this and not submitted projects, right?
Well, we have checked this already at
the start. So if it is not true, that's
means it is false, right? So to check
again it makes no sense, you have to
remove it. So now of course we can go
and test it. Let's go and have here 100
and the submitted project is false.
Let's go and execute it. You will get A.
And that's because the conditions over
here is giving false. The score yes is
over 100, but it's not enough. Both of
them should be true. That's why this guy
going to fail and Python going to go to
the second one. Now, this time we have
only one condition. It is true. And in
this case, we are sure that submitted
project is false. That's why the print A
going to be executed. But now, if you go
and turn it to true and execute, you
will get the A plus. And that's because
the first two conditions are giving true
and Python going to go execute this one
and jump immediately to the end of the
chain. So, nothing else going to be
executed over here. Now, let's try one
more thing. Let's say that our student
has a score of 50, but our student did
submit a project and it was successful.
So, it makes no sense to give this
student an F. We could give this student
a last chance by the last check. So, we
check if the score is higher or equal to
60. Or let's say if our student did
submit a project, then it's fine to give
the student D. So, if you go and execute
it, you will get D here. So, this time
we are not giving our student an F
because he submitted a project. So, at
this scenario, you have to go and use
the or operator like this. And the only
way as a student to get an F if your
score is less than 60 and at the same
time you didn't submit a project. So,
you have here false. If you go and
execute it, you will get an F. So, there
is no chance to help here. You have
either to have a nice score in the exam
or you submitted a project. So, this is
how we can ask two questions at the same
time using the logical operators.
Okay, now we have another type or form.
We call it the independent if
statements. So, they are like separated
checks that's going to be evaluated one
by one. And they don't have like
dependency between them. So, let's see
what this means. Okay, again here we
have our extra condition and we are
wondering where we going to place it. So
far, we have learned how to position
this question inside the same chain. So,
we are always putting the condition
between the start and the end. Doesn't
matter whether left, right, or at the
start, but now we're going to break the
chain and we're going to put our
question completely outside. So, that
means once everything is done with the
first if statement chain, we're going to
go and [clears throat] add another new
if statement. And they have nothing to
do with each others. So, that means now
our second question is actually
completely independent from the first
question. So, this is what we mean with
the independent if statements. All
right, so now let's try this independent
if statements. Now, we have two
variables and I would like to check
those informations separately. So, now
we start with the first if the score is
higher than 90, then we print, let's
say, high score. Otherwise, if it is
false, then we need an else and we print
low score. So, this is the first chain.
It starts with the if and ends with the
else. Now, if you go after the else and
you start a new if statements, it going
to be completely independent from the
previous one. And as you can see, we are
starting as well at the same level. So,
here I'm going to go and evaluate the
submitted projects. And if it is true,
then print project is submitted.
And if it is false, so we need an else,
print
project is
not submitted. So, now let's check this.
We have the score 50 and the project is
not submitted. If you go and execute it,
you can see now we are getting two
results. Low score and the project is
not submitted. Usually, if you have like
one chain, you get only one answer. And
that's because Python is executing those
if statements independently. So, what
happens here? Python going to say,
"Okay, we have here an if statements
where we have a question. Well, it is
not fulfilled, that's why it's going to
jump to the else statements and print
low score." So, that's it for the first
chain and everything is done and Python
going to see another if statements and
say, "How? Now we have a new chain, a
new story." So, it's going to check,
"Okay, is the submitted project equal to
true?" Well, it is false. That's why as
well here Python going to go and jump to
the else statement and print project is
not submitted. So, as you can see, those
two if statements are separated and we
don't have here any nested if
statements. So, there is no dependencies
between them and as well if this means
if we have here like a true, that
doesn't mean that Python going to go and
ignore the second chain. They have
nothing to do with each others. So, this
is how we can do independent if
statements.
All right, friends. Now we going to talk
about something cool, the inline if
statements or we call it sometimes a
ternary operator. So, instead of writing
the if else statements in multiple
lines, you can go and put the whole
thing in one quick line. So, it is
quick, shorter, and doesn't take a lot
of space. So, let's understand what this
means. So, we start as usual with the if
statements and after that we have our
condition. So, nothing new so far. And
as we learned before, next we going to
use double points and then a new line
where we going to tell Python what to do
if it's true. This time instead of all
of this, we going to stay at the same
line, but this time before the if
statements, we going to write a value
like for example A and with that we are
saying if the score is greater or equal
to 90, then go and assign the value A.
So, that means we define what can happen
if it's true before writing the if
statements and the condition. So, this
is the syntax and now let's say that it
is false, the score is not higher or
equal to 90, then after the condition we
use the statement else and after that we
define what can happen if it's false.
So, as you can see now we have
everything in one line, we don't have to
have multiple lines and here we have new
rules on how to use this. The first one,
this time you cannot skip the else. You
must include both if and else in each
inline if statements. The other one, if
you have multiple conditions, you cannot
go and use the else if. So, in this
structure you have only if and else and
there is no else if. And there is the
one more thing that is really amazing.
You can save the output of this inline
if statements going to be stored in a
variable. So, it is quick expression to
calculate the value and then store it in
variable. So, as you can see it is very
powerful, simple, readable, and really
easy and quick to write. But here the
trade-off, you can use it only if the
logic is very simple. So, let's go and
practice about this. Okay, so now back
to our example where we have the
classical if else statements with
multiple lines. Now we're going to go
and convert this to one inline. So,
let's do it step by step. I'm going to
rewrite first this part over here, the
true. So, if the score is higher than
print A. But now instead of saying print
A, I'm going to go and assign the A
first. So, I'm going to say, "Okay, it
is A if the score
is greater or equal to 90." So, as you
can see, I'm reading it differently. I'm
saying here, "It is A if the score is
greater or equal to 90." But in the
classical one we read it like this, "If
the score is greater or equal to 90,
then print A." So, it is like the way
around. And now this is of course not
enough. We have always to include an
else. So, if this is not true, what's
going to happen? We're going to print F.
Now, as you can see, the whole logic is
in one line instead of having multiple
lines. Now of course, if I go and here
comment of all those stuff and execute,
nothing going to happen in the output
because there is no action. I'm just
like saying the value is A. So, instead
of that, we're going to go and put the
whole thing in print. This is something
that you cannot do with the classical if
statements. So, I cannot go over here
and put everything in one big print. It
will not work. But this is why this
inline if statement is cool. So, if you
go and execute it, you will get an A.
So, as you can see, we are getting the
same result, but this is way cooler,
shorter, and easier to read. Now, what
else we could do with that? We can
assign it to a variable and then we can
go and print the variable later if you
want or do any other manipulations. So,
we still going to get the same results.
All right, so that's it. Let's go and
try something else like for example, we
can have something more complex where
this time we have an else if. So, let me
just zoom out. Now, we have like three
values and we have to try to put
everything in one line. So, now as we
learned we cannot go and use the else if
here in the in line. We have only to use
the if and the else. So, this is how I
do it. I usually like read it. So, we
say assign A if the score is equal or
greater to 90. Else, don't go and assign
F immediately. We still have to check
something. So, we're going to say else
assign B if the score is greater or
equal to 80. So, this looks exactly like
the first part. So, it's like we are
starting completely new if and this if
needs as well an else. You cannot skip
that, my friend. So, if it is not true,
only then you can write an if. So, you
can see we have completely new if
statements exactly after the else. So,
with that we have like two in line in
one line and let's test it. So, I'm just
going to go and commit everything here.
So, let's go and execute. We will get A
because this condition was true and the
value here get assigned. Let's have
something like 85 and execute. You will
get B because this part failed and then
Python went to the else and the other
condition is checked. Well, it is true.
That's why we got a B. Now, let's have
50. As you can see, we're going to get
the final else. So, yeah as you can see
each if need an else and if you are
putting everything side by side, the
last else should has the last value. And
now there is like one trick still you
can put this in multiple lines if you
put everything in parentheses.
So, you can say the first part could be
here, then the else, and the final else.
If you go and execute it, you're still
going to get the same results. But now,
my friends, this all makes no sense if
you have complex logic, where you have
things are nested like this. You have
two conditions, and you're checking
multiple stuff. When things got
complicated, go back to the classical if
else statements because it is then
easier to read. Don't misuse the inline
if statements for complex logic. It is
here only for quick stuff. So, you want
to quickly check something, then assign
a value. So, this is really cool way in
order to write our conditions.
>> [music]
>> All right, friends. Now, we're going to
talk about the second special type of
the conditional statements, which is
really new in Python. We call it the
match case. So, it's all about we
evaluate an expression or a value
against multiple possible values. And
Python going to execute the block of
code for the first match. So, now, let's
understand what this means and why do we
have it. So, now, let's say that you
have the following task, where it says,
"Convert the long name of the countries
into two letters abbreviation." So, that
means we have to convert the long form
into short form for the names of the
countries. Okay, first, let's go and
write it in the classical way. So, we
say the country is equal to, for
example, let's say United States.
And now, what we're going to do, we're
going to go and check the value of this
variable, and then print the
abbreviation. So, we're going to say,
"If
country is equal equal to United States,
then what's going to happen? We're going
to go and print the abbreviation, right?
So, it's going to be US. And if the
value is unknown for us, let's say we
want to print unknown
country." So, now, if you go and execute
this, you will get US. Now, of course,
we have to go and cover all the
countries, right? So, let's go to the
next one. Let's say, "Else if." Let's go
and cover, for example, India. So, if
the country is equal equal to India,
then print the abbreviation IN. So, now
if we have India over here in the
country and execute it, you will get EN.
Now, what can happen my friends? We're
going to have really very long list. So,
for example, the next one, let's say
Egypt, EG, and another one
or Germany, DE, and so on. So, you can
imagine how long this code going to be.
So, now in Python and as well in any
other programming language, if you have
this scenario where you have a value and
you are comparing it to multiple other
options using the equal operators, you
can use the match case. So, the syntax
for that is very simple. We start with
the keyword match and then the value
that we want to evaluate. It is the
country. So, after that we have double
points. So, with that we said, "Okay,
I'm going to go and evaluate this value
and after it you're going to write all
your cases or let's say the patterns
that you are searching for. So, how we
do it? We hit enter and then case. And
now all what you have to do is write the
value that you are searching for. So,
you're going to say United States and
then double points and another enter. Be
careful of the indent. Now, we are at
the second level. So, we say print US.
So, actually, that's it. We have covered
the first case. Let's go to the second
one, case
India, then double points,
print
EN. So, again, we have another one, case
Egypt,
then print EG,
and the last one, case
Germany,
print DE. So, now with that we have
covered our four cases over here, but
what is missing is the else, right? So,
now here if we didn't find any matching
with those cases, we can write the
default case. So, if none of the above
did match, you're going to do it like
this. You say case and then underscore
like this and then double points. So, we
are saying if none of above is matching,
then go and execute this case, the
default one. So, it can be print unknown
country. And that's it, my friends. So,
now let's go and compare them side by
side. Now, by just the visual of this,
this one is really easier to read than
the previous one, right? You have here
sometimes if, then else if, then else,
and the variable is repeated like here
five times. In the match case, we have
it only once, and as well the equal
operator is everywhere. So, the things
that you have here to do is way more
than the match case. The match case
looks really clean, neat, and very
organized. So, now let's try this out.
So, we have here the country India, and
if you go and execute it, the second in
came from our match case. And if you go
here and say Egypt, execute, you will
get EG. So, my friend, it is working.
Now, of course, here the big rule is
that you can use it only if you are
matching values. So, for example, in
that previous example with the student
scores, we have greater or equal, those
stuff will not work because you cannot
use it. As you can see over here, we
don't have here any operations because
this one is matching the values exactly
using the equal operators. So, we cannot
go and use any operators like greater,
less, or even the logical operators. So,
this is only for matching one-to-one. If
you have complex logic where you have
multiple stuff, you still have to use
the classical if else. And by the way,
this works only with the Python version
3.10 and the newer. So, if you have an
older version, you cannot use this at
all. And what else we can do? Uh by the
way, we can go and add a pipe over here,
and we can check multiple values like
this. So, if it is United States, or
let's say USA, so if it is one of those
two values, we can print USA. So, so
let's try this out. Let's have here USA,
and execute. You can see we are getting
US. So, if you have like multiple
variants that has the same output, you
can separate them using the pipe. But,
of course, that's it. We cannot go and
use any other operators. So, this is
another special case that you can use in
order to write the conditional
statements that is clean, structured,
and easy to read and to write.
All right, friends. So, now let's have a
quick recap about what we have learned
so far. So, now we use the if statements
in order to build the first condition.
We use the else if statements in order
to have a follow-up question if the
answer of the previous condition or
answer was false. And we use the else
statement as a fallback. So, if all the
previous conditions are not true, the
last thing that's going to be executed
is the else statements. Now, as we have
learned, we have like different designs
for different purposes. If you use only
the if statements, you are building just
one quick condition. So, you want to do
a quick check before doing something.
Like, for example, in data engineering,
we check if the file exists before
loading it. Now, the other design, we
have the if else. So, if you have like
two codes and you say either execute
this or that. Now, another design, if
you have a lot of else if, so you are
doing like branching. This you're going
to use it if you have many options, but
only one should be chosen. So, only the
first match wins. And then we have
learned that we can do if statement
inside another if statements. And this
is very helpful if you want to make a
decision inside another decision. So,
it's like you are saying, "Okay, first
check whether the user is logged in."
And then we can say, "Okay, let's check
whether the user is an admin or a
guest." It's like you're building a
decision tree. And then we have learned
we can design it like this. We could
have like independent ifs. So, if after
if after if. So, this you have to use it
if all the conditions must be checked.
Nothing must be skipped. All the
conditions are equally important and you
want to check everything, not just the
first match. And we have learned as
well, if you have this scenario where
you want to do quick and short decision,
you could use the single line if
statements or we call it in line if
statements. So, everything is compacted
and in one line, but don't forget we are
allowed only to use if and else. You are
not allowed to use the else if. And the
last thing, if you want to match exact
values and you would like to have clean
and readable code, then you can go and
use the modern match case. So, you can
use it if you want to have clean,
readable, and fast code. But of course,
you cannot use it for complex logics or
combined logics. It's only for matching
exact value. So, those are the types and
when to use what.
Okay, so now it's [music] challenge time
and I have for you two challenges. The
first one we're going to do it together,
but the second one you have to do it
alone. So, the first challenge is to
validate the values of the emails. So,
we have to make quality checks in order
to detect the issues. So, the rules are
like this. The email must not be empty.
It must contain a dot and at. It must
contain [music] exactly one at symbol.
The email must end with .com, .org, or
.net. And it must not be longer than 254
characters. And the last one, it must
start [music] or ends with a letter or
digits. So, now pause the video, do it
alone, and then we're going to do it
together.
All right, so now I hope that you are
already done. Now, I'm going to show you
how I'm going to do it. Now, first we
need a variable and let's start with an
empty string like this. So, now let's
start with the first one, the email must
not be empty. So, that means we have to
build a condition to check the values.
And since this is the first condition,
we start with the if. Now, the condition
is very simple. We're going to say if
the email equal equal to double quotes
without anything inside it, then this is
going to be an issue and we're going to
go and print it to the output. So, we're
going to say the email cannot be empty.
So, this can happen if the email is
empty. Otherwise, we're going to say
else print
the email is valid. So now let's go and
try this out and execute. You can see
the email cannot be empty. So we have
here an issue. And if you go and add
anything inside it, you will get the
email is valid. Well, this is not really
correct because we didn't apply all
other rules. But now what could happen
to that we could have like multiple
spaces inside the email address and this
considered to be as well empty. We don't
have any like real email. Go and execute
it, you're still going to get the email
is valid. But actually for us it is
empty. Now how are we going to fix it?
Usually first we clean up the data
before doing any checks. So what we're
going to do, we're going to remove all
the white spaces in our email and then
start applying the checks. So we're
going to say first clean the string. So
we're going to do it like this. Email is
equal to email {dot} and here we're
going to use the methods. Remember?
Strip. So if you use it, you are
removing the leading and the trailing
spaces. So that means we are first
cleaning the emails and then we are
checking stuff. Let's go and try this
out. Now you can see the email cannot be
empty. That's because we removed the
spaces and then this is equal to an
empty string. Great. So with that we are
done with the first check. Let's go to
the second one. The email must contain a
dot and ads. So that means we have to go
and add another condition, another
check. And what we're going to do, we're
going to go and use the else if. So if
it is not empty, then we have to check
another thing. So let me just grab the
comment over here. So now how we're
going to do this? You remember we had
like special operator in order to check
the existence of string inside another
string. So we use the in operator. So
we're going to say that {dot}
in email and the other one going to be
at in email. So now let's go and add
double points and we're going to print
email must contain {dot} and at. So now
let's try this out. Let's have any email
without a dot
or let's say at. So, if you go and
execute it, so now as you can see this
is not working. We are getting the email
is valid. Well, we have something wrong
with this condition, right? Now, what
this condition is returning is dot in
email, so this is false and at in email,
this is as well false. But actually,
what we need, we need to get a true at
the output. So, we're going to go and
reverse everything with the not
operator. So, with that we are saying if
this rule is not true, then we have an
issue, right? So, now if you go and
execute it, you will get the issue email
must contain dot and at. Now, if I go
and add only the at, let's go and try
this out. You can see we still are
getting the issue, but if I go and add
now the dot and execute, the email is
valid. So, again, what happens here, dot
in email, this is true and at in email,
this is a second true. We are using the
and operator, so the whole thing going
to return true, but as we convert it to
not, the condition is not fulfilled and
Python will not print it. So, with that
Python going to go to the else and print
email is valid. So, with that we have
solved this check. Let's move to the
next one. The email must contain exactly
one at. So, that means we have to go and
add another check using the else if.
Now, it must contain exactly one at
symbol. So, how we going to solve it? We
have to go and count how many at we have
in our email and if it is exactly one,
then it's fine. I remember for that we
have a method called count. So, we're
going to say email dot count. What we
are counting? We are counting the at,
right? So, if this is not equal to one,
then we have an issue.
So, we're going to say email must
contain exactly one at. So, let's go and
try this out. Now, we have only one at.
So, if you go and execute it, you will
get the email is valid. But now, let's
say that I have here another ads in my
email. If you go and execute it, you
will get this issue. Email must contain
exactly one ads because the count of
this can be two, and two is not equal to
one. So, this is correct. That's why we
are getting this message. Okay, so as
you can see, things are really easy.
Let's keep going. Another check. So, we
are checking the email must ends with a
.com, .org, or .net. So, another else if
email So, now how we going to solve it?
We have to check the end of the string.
So, the end of the email must match one
of those values, right? So, for that,
you remember we have a special method to
check the end of the string. So, it is
ends with. We have to pass for it a
value. And we're going to say here .com.
And then we can say or and the whole
thing again for the .org. And of course,
we have to go and repeat that for the
.net. Well, this going to work, but we
have some smarter solution for it by
using the sets. I know we didn't talk
about it yet, but it is not bad to see
how those stuff works here. So, we just
going to make like a sequence of string
values separated with a comma. So, .org
and as well, .net. So, now if the email
ends with those stuff, everything going
to be fine. But we are not checking
whether everything is fine. We are
checking the opposite. So, that's why
we're going to go and add a not. And
then we're going to say print email must
ends with .com, .org, or .net like this.
So, now for this example, if you go and
execute it, it will be bad because we
still have an ads. So, let me just
remove it. Then again, you can see the
email is valid. So, we are good with all
those checks. But now if you have
something like get an issue. Email must
end with .com, .org, or .net. And this
comes exactly from this
check. Okay, so let's keep going. The
next one. The email not be longer than
254 characters.
So, another else if. So, it's not
longer. So, we have to calculate how
many characters we have inside our
emails, right? And you remember, we have
a built-in function, really nice one.
So, the length of the email, and with
that we're going to get exactly how long
is our email, and we're going to say the
result must not be greater than 254,
like this. And if this happens, then we
have an issue with the email. Must not
be longer than 254 characters. So, now
Let me just remove this and execute it.
We will not catch this error because it
is less than 254. But if you go now and
write a big email with all those
characters, you will get the issue. So,
it is very simple. Let's go to the last
one. This is going to be interesting
one. So, the last check, the last else
if. So, what do we have here? The email
must start and end with a letter or
digit. So, that means we have to go and
check the first character and the last
character of my email. They could be
only letters or numbers. We cannot have
special characters. So, in order to get
at the first character, you remember, we
have to go and use the index. So, the
index of the first character is email,
and then we have zero over here. And the
last one, of course, you cannot go and
start counting the index of the last
character like this because each email
has like different length. But instead,
we count from the right side. And you
remember, we use the negative values,
the minus one. And now, one more thing,
we're going to go and add an and in
between, but still we need some kind of
function or method, right, to validate
this. And in Python, we have a special
method called is alnum. So, this one is
going to check whether the string value
is alphanumeric. So, it contains only
letters or digits. If yes, then we're
going to get true, otherwise we're going
to get false. So, it is really nice. We
didn't learn about this before. This is
the first time we talk about it. So, we
can have this check on the first
character and the last character. And of
course, we're going to put everything
between not.
So, we are saying if this is not
following our rule, then of course, we
have an issue.
So, we're going to say print
email must start and end with a letter
or digit.
Now, as you can see, everything is okay.
But, if you go for example at the start,
and let's have like a minus. Let's go
and execute. You can see we are getting
an error because the first character is
actually a special character. That's why
we are getting the issue. Let's go and
try the end. I'm going to go and have
hash. Let's execute. Surprise, surprise,
we are getting something else. The email
must end with .com, .org, and .net. And
this is really nice because Python going
to execute this one over here and then
stops. So, that means the other data
qualities will not be checked actually.
So, now here we have like a decision to
make. Do you want our code to stop
checking once we find the first issue?
Or we would like to see all the issues
inside our codes? Well, currently our
design going to stop once we encounter
the first issue. But, now if you say,
"You know what? I would like to have a
quality check to see all the issues."
Then, you cannot go and use the else if.
You have to go and use the independent
if statements for each check. So, now
what we can do, we can go over here and
convert everything to the if.
And as well over here. You can of course
do find and replace. So, now if you go
and execute, we will get both of the
issues. The email must not end with
.com, .org, .net, and the email must
start and end with a letter and digits.
So, this is really nice. And as you can
see now, we are understanding why we
have those different designs, right?
Now, we can go and add like a third
issue for example to odds and execute.
With that, we are getting now three
issues in the output. So, with that, we
are getting a full report about the
issues of our email. And here we have
like small issue where the last else is
actually not for everything. It is only
for the last if statements. So, now if
you want to have this else, you have to
include it in each if statements. Or you
can go and simply remove it like this.
Or another solution, if you would like
to really to have this else that
everything is fine, what we can do, we
can introduce a new variable like let's
call it valid and it is equal to true.
And now what we can do, if we encounter
any issues, we're going to make this
valid is equal to false.
So, we are printing and at the same
time, we are changing the flag. So,
we're going to go and add this
everywhere
where we have an issue.
And as well over here. And the last one.
But here we don't use actually an else.
What we're going to do, we're going to
use an if statement in order to check
this flag at the end. So, that means if
this value is true, then go and print
the email is valid. Let's try this out
and execute it. Now, as you can see, we
are not getting the email is valid
because everything is really crazy here.
Let's go and have another
clean one and then execute. You can see
the email is valid. And that's because
everything did return false and none of
them got executed. So, the value inside
the valid is actually coming from the
first one here. So, it's going to stay
true and none of our condition did
convert it to false. With that, we are
getting this nice message at the end,
the email is valid. All right, my
friends, I know that was not part of the
task, but it was interesting how to
solve it. And now we're going to move to
the second challenge. So, now you have
to check the quality of the passwords.
So, here are the rules. The password
cannot be empty. The password must be at
least eight characters long and it must
include at least one uppercase letter
and one lowercase letter. Another one,
the password must not be same as the
email address. So, this is going to be a
weak password if you do that. And the
password must not contain any spaces.
So, one space, multiple spaces, tabs.
And the last rule, the password must
contain only letters or digits. So, good
luck with that. Now, pause the video and
go solve this challenge.
All right, my friends. Now, by looking
back to our road map, with that you have
learned the conditional statements, so
you learned how to make your program
make decisions based on logic. And now
we come to the last chapter in this
category, control the flow of your code.
We have the loops. And here we going to
learn two types, the for loop and the
while loop. This is going to be your
introductions to automations. So,
they're going to help you to make smart
code instead of repeating the same code
over and over. So now, let's get started
with the loops in Python.
So now, let's start with the first
question. What are loops? A loop is like
a tool that we use to control the flow
of our codes. And if you use it, you are
saying like, "Hey, I would like to
repeat this code, this thing, over and
over until I say stop or something
happened. Maybe a condition is not
fulfilled anymore." So now, let's have
sketch to understand what this means. So
now, normally, as we are coding, we
write instructions one after another.
And if you go and execute it, Python has
to go from the top to the bottom
executing all your instructions one
after another. And all your instructions
will be executed from Python. So, it is
a straight line code. And that's great
for simple stuff. But in reality, as you
are coding, what could happen is that
you will notice there is like block of
code that keep repeating. It could be
repeated like five, 10, or even 100
times. That means we are repeating
ourselves, and this is not really good
because our code can explode. Instead,
what we could do, we could put our code
in autopilot. So, what we can do, we
write this block of code only once and
then we attach it to a loop. This loop
going to go and execute the block of
code over and over as long as the
condition is true. So, that you write
your code only once and you repeat it as
much as you need. And in Python and as
well in many other programming
languages, they are two main types of
loops. We have the for loops and the
while loops. And each type has different
types and purposes. Now, we're going to
deep dive into the for loops. So, let's
start.
A for loop [music] lets you go through a
group of items one by one in order to do
something for each item. So, it's like
you are saying, do something for each
item in my list. So, let's understand
exactly what this means. So, now we
start in our code with the keyword for
in order to build the loop and once
Python sees the for keyword, it going to
go immediately behind the scenes and
start building a logic, a process. So,
it has a start and as well a condition.
And of course, this condition is not
specified from us in the code. It is
something that Python do once it sees
for. So, the condition going to be
always like this, is it the last item?
So, it is actually asking, am I done? Is
it the last item in the group of items?
You will understand exactly what I mean
with this one we have an example. And as
usual, the answer for each condition
could be either true or false. So, this
what going to happen once you specify
your for. Now, next we have to define
the loop variable. So, it's like a
variable that we going to use to assign
the current value of a sequence. You
could name it whatever you want, and I
item, user, whatever. And then we use
the operator in and after that very
important is the sequence. You define
here the group of items that should be
iterated. So, with that, we give Python
the list that we would like to iterate.
And this is what we call a sequence. And
now, Python, behind the scenes, going to
take this sequence and create it out of
it an object in the memory called
iterator. This iterator is responsible
for knowing where we are currently in
the loop and what is the next item in
the sequence. So, it keeps tracks on
what is already done and what is next.
So, with that, we have now the setup the
configuration of our for loop. how we
have to iterate three times because we
have three items, but still we have to
tell Python
what to do. Which line should be
repeated, right? Of course, in order to
do that, we have to do the double points
and then go to a new line. And don't
forget here the indentations. So, we
have to leave four spaces and then write
the line that should be iterated. Like,
for example, it could be print the item.
And now, Python knows this block of code
should be repeated. And this going to be
if the condition is false. So, as long
as we still have items, this code should
be repeated. And of course, after the
execution of the print, it going to go
back to the start in order to grab the
next item. And of course, if the
condition is true, so we are at the end,
Python going to go and end the loop. And
that means we can go and execute the
next instructions. So, now let's see how
Python going to execute this. So, as
usual, we start from the beginning. And
now, it goes to the condition. It going
to say, "Is it the last item?" So,
Python going to go and ask the iterator,
"What is next?" And since we are at the
beginning, it going to go and answer,
"Okay, the first one is one." So, the
iterator going to answer Python with the
value one. And this means the condition
is not fulfilled. It is not the last
item. We still have values in the
iterator. That's why it's going to go to
the path of the false. Now, it going to
go and execute our block of code, print
I. And here, Python assigns the value
one to the variable I. And that's why we
need the loop variable in order to
assign the values that we are getting
from the iterator or the sequence. And
now, once our code is done, it's going
to go back to the start. And then,
what's going to happen, my friend? It's
going to go and ask again, "Give me the
next item." So, now the iterator going
to say, "Okay, we are done with the
first item." Then, they're going to go
to the second item and return two. So,
Python sees, "Okay, we still have
values. That's why we are not done yet."
It's going to go back to the print. And
this time, I is equal to two. And it's
going to go and print it in the output.
And again, it's going to go back to the
start and ask the same question. "Are we
done? Do we have anything next?" Now,
the iterator say, "Okay, we are done
with the two. Let's go to the next one,
the three." So, Python going to get
three. It is not done yet. It's going to
go and print it in the output. And
again, go back to the start. But this
time, if Python ask the iterator what is
next, it's going to see, "Ah, the three
is the last item in the group." So, it's
going to say for Python, "Sorry, we
don't have anything else. You have to
stop." Now, once Python gets the stop,
it's going to say, "Okay, we reached the
end. We have processed the last item.
That's why this time the condition is
fulfilled." And it's going to break the
cycle and get out of the loop. So, we
reach the end. So, as you can see, our
block of code, the print I is executed
three times. We didn't have to repeat it
three times in our code. We just built a
for loop for it, and it get iterated.
Again, it's like autopilot. All right.
Now, let's say that we have the
following example that we are printing
like rounds. So, we are saying round
one, and then we repeat this like five
times. So, round one, two, three, four.
So, now let's go and execute it. You can
see we are getting the exact same stuff.
So, everything so far static, of course.
And of course, we are repeating the same
code over and over. But just the only
thing that is changing is the round
number. Now, of course, this is not very
smart because we are repeating the same
code over and over. And instead of that,
we can write our code once and then put
it in a loop. So, we can go and get rid
of everything. And then, we say for I,
this is our variable, and then we define
the sequence like this, 1 2 3 4 5. Now,
we go and add double points. With that,
we have defined the structure of the for
loop. We are saying let's iterate
through this sequence, and then we hit
enter. Now, we have to be careful with
the spaces. The indentations here should
be four spaces, for example, and then we
can go and grab our prints and put it
over here. So, now the print is inside
for loop. And now, if you go and execute
it, what's going to happen? Python going
to go and repeat this code five times.
And that's because in our sequence, we
have five values. So, that means we have
five items in our list, and Python has
to go through them one by one. And with
that, we are getting the output, but we
are not there yet because we are
printing the same code. I would like to
have the value of the sequence in the
output as well. Of course, the value of
the sequence are always assigned to the
variable. So, what you can do, we can go
and use our string format, and then we
have to go and replace this static part
with the loop variable. So, we don't
need you anymore, and here we have an I.
So, now for each round, you will get the
value from our sequence. Let's go and
execute it. Now, you can see we are
getting the exact same output. So, round
1 2 3 4 5, and those values are coming
actually from the sequence. So, it is
very simple, right? You just have to
define the loop and then tell Python
what to do for each iteration. Now, I
would like to show you something like a
rule for the naming of the variable and
the sequence that we usually use. So,
for example, we could put our sequence
in a variable called items equal to this
value, and then we could use this
variable inside our for loop. You can
see items, but usually we going to call
it like this, for item in items. So, the
variable name is a singular, and the
sequence going to be like plural for the
same name. And it is really nice to
read, for item in items. And if you have
like tables, you could say for table in
tables, for file in files. So, this is
really nice. Just use the same name as a
singular for the variable and plural for
the sequence. And of course, we can go
over here and call item. And if you go
and execute it, you will get the same
results. This is really cool. You know
immediately this variable here gets its
value from the items.
Now, there is something important to
understand about the for loop is that we
have always to specify a sequence, a
group of items that has a start and end.
In the current example, where we have
the numbers 1 2 3, this is what we call
a tuple. It is a data structure that we
can learn about it later, don't worry
about it. But we could use as well other
sequences. Like for example, we could
use a list. A list is as well a
sequence. Let's have an example. So, now
let's check that out. If we go and
remove this and have the brackets at the
start and as well at the end. So, if you
go and I'll execute it, you will get the
same results. This is as well a sequence
of numbers and Python going to treat it
as a sequence. So, we could use as well
list in our example. And by the way, for
example, let's go and remove the five
and add a string value like hi. This and
now if you go and execute it, you will
get the last one round hi. So, there is
no rule in the for loop that the items
must be either be numbers or string
values. You can go and do like a mix.
Okay, the next one that we could use is
a string. A string value it might like
looks like one value, but actually it is
a sequence of letters. So, each
character, each letter is actually one
value. That means we can go and iterate
through a string value. Let's have an
example. Okay, so let's try this out.
I'm going to go and remove the whole
thing over here. Let's have a value like
Python. So, this time we have like one
string value and we going to go and
iterate it. Let's go and check that out.
Now, as you can see, each letter going
to be like one value and Python going to
go and iterate through the whole string.
And of course, if you have here some
spaces, it's going to be considered as
well as a character. So, if you go and
execute it, you will get for the first
round a space. So, with that, you can
see our string value is not only one
value. It is actually a sequence of
characters that has a start and an end.
And you can use it in the for loop as a
sequence. Okay, moving on to the next
one, what else we could use in the
sequence of that? We can use a built-in
function called range. So, let's say
that you would like to iterate like 100
times. It's going to be really annoying
to make a tuple with 1 2 3 4, and like
you define 100 values, right? Instead of
that, we could use this built-in
function range to generate a sequence of
numbers. Now, in this function, we can
define many things. Let's start with the
one that is very common. We specify a
stop. So, we use the stop to tell when
it must stop generating numbers. For
example, if you go and say range five,
the sequence will looks like this. It
start with 0 1 2 3 4. So, with that, the
total generated numbers are five, and
you can see we don't have the number
five in the output because otherwise
it's going to be six numbers. And this
is might be confusing for many where
they think if you add five, you will see
it as well in the output. Well,
actually, the stop will not be included
because it starts from zero. So, let's
try this out. So, now we have here again
our sequence of numbers using a tuple.
Now, let's go get rid of this, and
instead of items, we will use the
function range. And we have to pass for
it value. Let's pass the five and try
this out. Now, as you can see the
output, we start with the round 0 1 2 3
4. So, this is really nicer instead of
writing like five numbers, right? Now,
if you go and say 100 and execute, it's
going to be very simple. It's going to
go and generate 100 numbers. And with
that, you iterate our code 100 times.
So, now let's go back to our five
example here and execute. Now, let's say
that this is not what exactly I need. I
would like to start from the round one,
not from zero. So, how we can uh fix
this? Now, we could use in the range
another argument. We could use the start
argument. This is optional. If you don't
specify anything, it's going to be
always the zero, right? But now we want
our start, that's why we going to go and
specify the start, like for example,
one, and with that we are forcing Python
to start generating from one. So, now if
you execute it, we will get sequence
that starts from 1 2 3 4 and then it
stops. It will not include the five in
the sequence because it doesn't include
the stop. So, by looking to this, the
start will be always inside your
sequence, but the stop will not be
inside. So, let's go and try this out.
Now, if you go over here and say, "Okay,
start from one." And execute. Now, in
the output it looks nicer. We are
starting from the round one as we want,
but we have the issue. We don't have any
more the round five. Now, in order to
have it in the output, we can go and
increase the stop to six. So, if you go
and execute it, you will get the round
five and we don't have the six, of
course. Okay, now moving on to the final
argument that we can pass to this
function, it is the step. It is as well
optional and we use it in order to
define or specify the incrementation. If
you don't include it, it's going to be
always the one. So, we always increment
our sequence with one. So, let's say
that I would like to go and generate all
the even numbers between zero and 10.
And now what we can do, we can specify
the step two. So, now the incremental
going to be two. Let's see what going to
happen. So, it starts from zero and then
the next generated number, it will not
be one because the incrementation here
is not one, it is two. That's why the
next number going to be two. Then the
next in the sequence going to be four,
then six and eight. And now, of course,
we will not have the 10 because the 10
is our stop. Now, let's say that I would
like to go and generate all the odd
numbers between one and 10. So, we can
have the same setup, but this time we
start counting from 1. So, now we start
from 1, then the next one 1 + 2 going to
be 3, and then 3 + 2 going to be 5, 7,
and then 9. And with that, we are
generating odd numbers. So, it looks
nice. So, let's try that out. I'm going
to go and add the stop 10 over here and
execute. You see we have all the numbers
between 1 and 10. Then, let's go and add
the step 2 and execute. You will have
only the odd numbers. So, as you can see
the iteration is less than before
because we are incrementing with two.
Now, if you go and say let's for example
four and execute, you will get only
three numbers. So, the step is bigger in
the sequence. So far, we are generating
only odd numbers. Now, let's say that I
would like to start from two and end at
10, and the step should be two. So, if
you go and execute it, you will get now
even numbers. So, it is very simple with
those three arguments, we can define
exactly how the numbers going to be
generated. So, this is how the range
function works. So, those are the famous
sequences that we usually use, but you
can as well use any other sequences like
for example the dictionary or maybe
files. So, any object in Python that is
iterable, you could use it in the for
loop.
Okay, so with that we have learned how
to build a loop, how to build iterations
inside our code. And now, of course,
always the question is why do we need
those stuff? How to use the for loop in
real projects? So now, in the data
world, usually we have like files or
tables that are in one place, and we
would like to go and move all those
tables from one place to another place.
Now, imagine that you have to write a
code for each table. So, if you have
like 100 tables, you're going to write
like the same code 100 times. Now,
instead of that, we can go and build a
loop in order to go through all the
tables one by one and start loading it
to the target place. So, we write at a
code once and we iterate through all
tables. And of course, it could be files
as well. You might have like 100 files
and you'd like to move them from A to B
and for that we usually build a loop.
Now, if you are working with data, we
might go and let's say clean up those
files, those tables. And if it is always
the same action that we would like to
use, what we can do, we can use as well
a loop. So, we go again and iterate
through all tables and do the same data
cleansing. So, with that, we are
preparing the data before maybe
analyzing it. Now, of course, not only
tables and files, we can go and iterate
through columns. So, let's say that we
have in our table multiple columns and
they are bad quality in the values of
the columns, like for example, we have
leading or trailing spaces. So, of
course, in Python we could use the strip
function in order to clean up the data.
So, now instead of applying this
function for each column inside our
code, you might have really big file or
table with hundreds of columns, instead
we make a loop for all columns and we
iterate through all the columns of our
table, where we apply the strip
function. So, with that, instead of
having hundred of lines, you have only
two lines of code, one line for the for
loop and the second one for the
function. So, as you can see, this can
be like foundations for you as you are
working with data. You use it in order
to load a data, we use it in order to do
data preparations, data cleansing and
many other stuff. So, the for loops are
really amazing. Okay, so now I'm going
to show you a few use cases where I use
for loop. So, we usually use it in order
to do aggregations, like summarizations,
finding the average. So, let's say that
we have here scores, a list of scores
and here we have few values, like 80,
50, 60 and 75. Now, I would like to go
and find the total of those scores. So,
we can go and create new variables in
order to store the total score. And now,
in order to do the summarizations of all
those values, we can go and use a loop.
So, we can say for and then I need a
variable. So, it's going to be score in
the sequence scores. And of course,
don't forget the double points. And now,
what we're going to do? We're going to
say total is equal to the current total
plus the scores. So, we are accumulating
the values we are getting from the loop
and we are storing it to the total. And
of course, as we learned in the
operations, we have some shortcut in
order to do this. We could add a plus
before the equal and then just remove
this. So, I am adding the scores to the
total. And now, we can go and print few
stuff. Like for example, we can say the
current total and then we say the total.
And outside of the loop, I would like to
see that final total. So, final total
and as well here, the variable total.
So, let's go and try this out. We got an
issue because this is wrong. You cannot
use the scores, the sequence. You have
to use the variable. So, the score, not
the scores. We use the scores only for
the iteration. So, let's try again. And
now, as you can see, it is working. So,
first we have the current total 80, then
plus 50, 130, 190 and the final total
going to be 265. So, as you can see, we
can use it in order to do some
aggregations. Okay, to the next one. As
we learned, we can do data clean up,
data preparations using for loop. So,
let's say that we have the list of files
like this. So, the first one going to be
report.csv
and the next going to be data.csv
and the third one final.txt.
And let's go and add some evil white
spaces on left, on right in order to
have some bad data quality. So, now here
we have two issues. We have the leading
and trailing spaces and as well, you can
see we have sometimes lower case and
uppercase. Now, I am a data engineer or
analyst and I would like to go and clean
up the data before I do something about
it. So, here I have to do two things.
First, removing the spaces. Second,
making everything either lowercase or
uppercase. So, depends on the rule that
I follow in my projects, I have to
change the cases. So, in order to do
that, we could go and create a for loop.
Going to say for file in files double
points. Now, what are the action going
to say file is equal to file. And we
have now to start clean up the data. So,
we can start with the strip function to
remove the white spaces. And now, in
order to test it, we're going to go and
print the result. So, we're going to say
processing and then the variable name
file. So, now let's go and test this
out. So, now by looking to the output,
you can see we don't have any more any
leading or trailing spaces. So,
everything looks fine. And with that, we
have cleaned up the names of our files.
Now, we are not done yet. We still have
this lower and upper cases. Now, we can
go and add the second transformation.
And I would like to say I'm going to go
and make everything lowercase. Now, if
you check the output, it looks way
nicer. Everything is lowercased and
everything is following our rule. And
another thing, let's say that I would
like to go and get rid of the txt.
Actually, we only allow CSVs. So, in
order to do that, we add another
transformation and we say replace. Now,
the old value going to be .txt and the
new value our standard is CSV. Now, it
is very important you don't write it
capitalized because we are doing this
the replace after we made everything
lower. So, it's always like this. First,
clean up the data and then do data
transformations where you adjust and
manipulate the data. The order is very
important. First, clean up and then
manipulate. So, now if you go and
execute it, with that, the final is as
well .csv. So, this is really amazing.
We write our data preparations only once
and then we build a for loop in order to
iterate through all our data. And this
is exactly the power of the for loops
and as a data engineer, analyst,
scientist, you have to do a lot of data
preparations in your pipelines and you
will end up using those for loops many
times. So, make sure to understand those
concepts. They going to be very
important for you. And my friends, it is
challenge time. So, you have to go and
print seven times table from 1 to 10,
but you must use a loop and it must look
exactly like this output. Don't miss one
character.
Okay, so if you are done with this, I
have for you a second challenge. You
have to print the following left aligned
star pyramids. So, the first line is one
star, the second is two, three and the
last one should include six stars. And
of course, my friend, you must use for
loop for this. So, go and solve that.
Okay, friends. Now, so far we have been
looping through items using a simple
way, very simple design. But now we
going to level it up and we going to
build and design an advanced loop. In
Python, they are like tools or add-ons
that we can put in our loop in order to
have more control like when to stop,
when to skip and here I'm talking about
the special loop statements. We have
break, continue, pass. So, let's start
with the first one, the break
statements. [music]
The break statement [music] is used in
order to immediately stop the loop. No
matter where you are currently in the
loop, you will exit. You will stop
everything and go out. And once Python
sees it, the loop ends right there and
go to the next line of the code. So,
let's understand how this looks like.
So, now by looking back to our simple
design of the for loop, you can see that
Python can execute all the items inside
our sequence without stopping at all
from the start until the end. There will
be no break, there will be nothing
unless of course your PC crashes. So,
everything going to be executed, but now
sometimes we would like to have a check.
If a certain condition is met, we have
to do something. So, that means we have
to build a condition using the if
statement and we have of course to do it
inside for loop. So, let's say that if
the item is equal equal to two,
something should happen. So, now by
looking back to our flowchart, that
means we are building a second condition
inside our loop. So, again, the first
condition comes from the for loop. It is
something built in and we didn't specify
it, but the second condition comes from
the if statement that we defined inside
the for loop. And of course, the answer
could be false or true. So, now we have
to tell Python what going to happen if
the condition is fulfilled. Of course,
you could like do something like print
or call a function, but if you want to
affect the iterations of the loop, we
could use one of the three statements.
So, we could use break, continue, or
pass. So, now since we are talking about
the break, if you go and use it, what
going to happen? Python going to put a
break if the condition is true and if
this happens, everything going to stop
and Python going to go immediately to
the end. But if the condition is not
fulfilled, everything is like before.
Python has to go and print the item.
Now, let's see how Python behind the
scenes. So, it going to start from the
beginning and ask for the next item. So,
that means we are not at the end of the
loop and Python going to continue. Now,
Python going to ask the second question.
Is I equal to two? Well, it's not
because one is not equal to two. That's
why it's going to go to false and Python
going to print one in the output. Then
jump back to the top and again ask the
same question. Are we done? Well, the
iterator going to answer with a value.
We are not done yet. So, that's why it
stays inside the loop and go and ask the
second question. Is I equal equal to
two? Well, this time yes. This is true.
Two is equal to two and that's why
Python going to go to the break
statements. Now, what going to happen
once Python sees break? It going to
destroy everything and stop everything.
So, there will be no more iterators and
Python jump immediately to the end and
it going to ignore everything else. So,
with that we didn't iterate through the
whole sequence. So, the iterator is not
done and we have only one successful
round, one iteration. But because we
have fulfilled the condition and the
break statements, everything stops. And
in the output you will get only one. So,
as you look to this, it's like we are
building an emergency exit right from
the loop. If something catastrophic or
emergency happens, we have to stop
everything that we are doing and get
out. This is exactly how the break
statement works in Python. Okay, so now
let's have an example where we have list
of names. So, we could have something
like John and Maria. And now we can have
something empty. So, we don't have any
value inside it and then let's say
Kumar. Now, you can see we have four
values, but one of them has an issue. We
have here empty. Now, let's just make a
normal loop in order to print the names.
So, we can say for name in
names. And now let's go and print. So,
we going to say F name equal to our
variable. So, name. Let's go and execute
it. Now, as you can see, we have all the
four values and the empty one even. Now,
let's say that if there is something
empty in my data, I don't want to
continue. I want to break the loop and
to stop the program. So, now in order to
do that, we have to make a check. So,
first we going to say if name is equal
equal to empty. So, with that we are
checking whether the name doesn't have
any value. Double point and now we hit
enter and print a message. Now, as you
can see, we are now at the second level
of the indentation. Print is inside if
and if is inside for. You have to be
careful with that. So, we can say empty
value detected.
And of course, this is not enough. We
want to stop everything. So, we're going
to write a break. And now, very
important to understand that break must
be inside an if, otherwise, you will
break from the first iteration. So now,
let's go and try this out. So now, in
the output, you can see we processed two
values, John, Maria, and then once we
processed the empty, this condition was
true, and we went inside it. So, we
printed the message empty value
detected, and then the break is
executed. So, that means we stopped over
here, and we didn't process those two
values. So, they didn't have the chance
to be printed over here. So, this is
exactly what going to happen if you use
a break inside your for loop.
Now, let's go to the next one, the
continue statements. We use it in order
to skip one loop cycle. So, that means
once Python sees the continue, it going
to stop right there, but instead of
ending the whole thing, the whole loop,
what going to happen, it just going to
jump back to the top and start the next
round. So, that means it is not that
catastrophic like the break, where it's
going to stop everything. We are just
skipping the current round, and go to
the next one. So, let's have a simple
example to understand it. Okay, so now,
in our code, after the condition, this
time, instead of using break, we will
use continue. So now, what going to
happen behind the scenes is that if the
condition is true of the if statements,
we will have continue instead of break.
But here comes the important points.
After continue, we will not go to the
end, we will just go jump back to the
top. So, we're going to have an arrow
from continue back to the start of the
loop. Of course, with that, we are not
saying we are going to the beginning of
the iterator, so we are not resetting
anything. It is just simply we are
skipping the current round. So, let's
try this out and see what can happen if
you do that. Now, Python starts from the
top and ask the iterator for the next
item. It's going to be the first one, so
the value number one, and then go and
ask the second condition, is one equal
to two? Well, it is false, that's why
Python going to go to the right side and
execute the loop as normal. So, in the
output you will get one and then jump
back to the top to repeat and ask the
same question, what is the next item?
The iterator answer with two and then to
the second question, is two equal to
two? This time, yes. We have fulfilled
the condition and Python goes to the
left side and execute continue. Continue
means skip the current one and just go
to the top and go to the next round. So,
with that we didn't do the normal
iteration, so Python will not execute
the print and you will not see the value
two in the output. So, we skipped the
two because it is fulfilling the
condition and Python has to start again
from the top and ask for the next item,
it's going to be three, and then ask the
second question, is three equal to two?
Well, it is false, and then go to the
right side to the normal loop. It's
going to print the value three and then
go to the top and ask for the next item.
Well, we are at the end, the iterator
ask Python to stop. So, with that the
answer going to be true and jump to the
end of the loop. So, as you can see now
in the output we have one and three, but
we skipped one round. So, it's not like
the break where we stopped the whole
iteration and we stopped everything and
went to the end, we just skipped one
single iteration because it was
fulfilling the condition. This is
exactly what continue means. Okay, so
now back to our example where we have
the four names and one of them is empty.
It was too much, you know, that once we
found it the empty over here we stopped
the whole loop because I would like to
process as well Kumar over here. So,
what we can do instead of having break,
we can say, you know what? Just
continue. Call continue and with that we
will skip only this one bad value, but
we will continue the loop. So, let's try
this out and execute. As you can see, in
the output we have now name is equal to
Kumar. So, we processed this value and
we still see our message empty value
detected and this comes from here. So,
that means yes, we found the bad data,
but we skipped it. We didn't process it
inside the branch. And with that, we
guarantee we are processing only the
good data. And in this scenario, I'm
going to say continue here is more
suitable than break because if I'm using
here break, it is like an overreacting.
I would like to process all other
values. It is only bad value inside my
data and I would like to process all
others. And since this is not really
critical, I could go with the continue
instead of [music] break. Okay, friends,
now we come to little break and I would
like to give you a little tip. If you
want to master something like, let's
say, mastering the functions or the data
structure,
I recommend you to try to teach it. So,
try to explain it to a friend, to maybe
a colleague at your work because once
you start teaching something, you can
understand the gaps in your knowledge
and you start filling those gaps by
maybe researching or watching one of my
videos. So, if you want to master
something, teach it.
Now, that's it. Let's go back to the
course.
So, that's all for the continue
statement. [music] Now, let's go to the
third one. We have the pass statements.
Pass is just like placeholder where
nothing happens. So, this sounds little
bit strange, but all what we are saying
here that I will put here code later,
but for now, just keep going. Don't
bother. What the pass statement means
for now, do nothing. So, let's
understand what exactly this means. All
right. Now, let's go and put pass inside
the F statements. So, that means instead
of continue, we're going to have pass
and this going to be executed if the
condition is true. Now, of course, what
is very important is where the arrow
going to go after the pass. Well, this
time it will not go to the end. It will
not go to the start of the loop. Well,
actually, it going to go to our block of
codes. So, it's going to go back to the
normal way of our loop. Now, if you look
to this, do you see something strange?
Well, it doesn't matter if the answer is
false and true, both of them are leading
back to our block of code, right? So,
that means we are not stopping anything
like the break, we are not skipping
anything like the continue, everything
going to stay as it is. So, the big
question is, why we need it? Well, we
don't use pass very often in our coding,
but we use it as a place holder as we
are planning the next steps. So, for now
in my code, I am sure that I have to
check for this situation where I is
equal to two, but I still don't know
what I'm going to do if the condition is
true. So, it's like I'm planning
something inside my code, I don't want
to forget about it, and I'm building
something temporary. And the final
solution should not, of course, include
pass. Now, let's have a quick example to
see how this can work. For the first
value one, well, is one equal to two?
The answer is false, Python going to go
and execute the print normally, and we
will see one in the output, and then go
back to the top and ask for the next
item, you will get two. Well, is two is
equal to two? This time we will go to
the left side and execute the pass, and
nothing going to happen. Python has to
go back to the print, and print in the
output two. So, you see, we are not
skipping, we are not ending anything,
then go back to the top and ask for the
third item, you will get three in the
output like usual. And the next one, the
iterator will give you no value and ask
for stop, that's why Python going to end
and go outside. So, as you can see, it's
like you are iterating without having
the condition. You iterated through all
the values 1 2 3. So, again, pass means
just keep doing what you are doing, keep
doing the iterations, and maybe later we
going to add something in this place.
So, it is like placeholder. So, now back
to our example where we have the four
names, and one of them is empty. But the
thing is, this is, yes, an empty value,
but I don't know yet what to do with it.
I could go and replace it with dummy
values like unavailable, unknown, maybe
some flags, but still I don't know what
to do with this. And in the other hand,
I don't want to skip it. I don't want
now to break the whole program or skip
this step. I would like to decide about
this later. So, what we can do, we can
go over here and say, "You know what?
We're going to make a pass." And then
I'm going to go and write a note for
myself so that I don't forget about it.
So, I'm going to say to do handle
empty value. And to be honest, I don't
want to print anything in the output cuz
we don't want to see this yet. So, this
is just something for me that I would
like to plan for the future, but at
least I know about this [snorts]
scenario. I know there is like an issue
like this, and I have already like a
condition for it to check it. But I
don't know yet the action. So now, if
you go and execute it, you can see we're
going to go and process all the names
that we have in our list. So, we are not
skipping anything. Maybe after a week, I
meet my team, and then we discuss about
this issue. I told them, "Yeah, we have
like some empty values in our data, and
I would like to know how to handle it."
And then we agreed all to have dummy
value like unknown. So now, I come back
to my code and say, "You know what?
Let's go and do it like this. Name is
equal to name and replace." And instead
of empty, we can have unknown.
So, it is like this, and I can go and
remove now the pass. We don't need it. I
know the action and execute it. You can
see now in the output, I'm getting the
unknown. So, we didn't skip, we didn't
stop anything, we just prepared it for
the next steps. And this is exactly how
we use this statement pass in our code.
So now, let's have a real examples on
how to use continue and break. So, the
first task, it says, "Loop through a
list of days and print only the working
days, skipping the weekends." So now,
let's go and create a list of days. So,
for example, let's have a Monday,
Sunday, Wednesday, and let's have a
Tuesday. Just randomly some days. So,
now we want to print in the output only
the working days. So, we don't want to
see any weekends. And for that, we can
go and create a for loop. So, we're
going to say for day in days, and then
double points. And now we're going to go
and print the work day.
Double points, and then our variable.
Day. That's it. Let's go and execute.
Now, in the output you can see we are
printing everything, even the weekends,
which is not really what we want. So, we
have to check whether the day over here
is a weekend. Now, for that, we have to
go and create an if statement. And we
can say if day in and then we're going
to have our two values, Saturday and
Sunday.
Like this. Now, if this is the scenario,
what can happen? Should we break or
should we continue? Well, as the task
says, we have to skip the weekend. We
don't have to stop everything, yeah? So,
it's not that catastrophic. That's why
we're going to go with the continue. We
want to skip those days, otherwise, go
and print the day. So, let's try this
out and execute. You can see we have
Monday, Wednesday, and Tuesday, but the
Sunday is not in the output, and that's
because it is fulfilling our condition
here. So, as you can see, it's very
simple. Why I decided for the continue?
Because I just want to skip, I don't
want to stop. So, now one thing quickly
about the styling. As you can see again,
I'm always using the same name. So, day
in days, and one more thing, try to not
put a list in conditions or maybe in the
for loops. So, as you can see for the
days, I always define a variable
outside. And for this as well here, I'm
going to go and take it out and make a
variable for it. So, we're going to say
weekends, and we're going to put it
outside. And then over here we can say
weekends. So, now as you can see, it is
now nicer and shorter and easy to
understand. For day in days, if day in
weekends, so it is easy to understand,
and you can here extended outside easily
than extending stuff inside the four or
the condition. Then things going to be
easy to write and easy to read. So, with
that we have solved that task. Okay, so
now let's have the following task and it
says "Scan through a list of email
addresses and prevent unsafe data from
entering your system." So now, as usual
we're going to go and create some sample
data. So, emails like for example
data@gmail.com
and another one farah@outlook
.de. And then we're going to have
something strange like drop table users
and semicolon. And then we're going to
have something like maria@gmail.com.
So now, let's say that I would like to
process my data and I'm going to say for
email in emails
and we're going to print
processing email and then double points
and our variable
like this. So now, let's go and execute
it. So now, with the output you can see
we have processed all the emails, but
actually we are not doing the job. The
task is to check whether everything is
safe and my friend, this is not safe at
all. We have here an SQL injection. SQL
injections, it's one of the most famous
hacker attacks on your applications that
could happen if you have any field where
the user is entering data. So maybe in
their registration form or in the
sign-in, you have a field to enter the
emails and with that the hackers going
to use it in order to add an SQL
injection to destroy your database or
maybe to read important informations.
And actually, it is one of the easiest
way in order to hack your system. That's
why most of the systems must protect
their data and their applications from
those SQL injections. Now, we can go and
check whether the email includes a
semicolon. Semicolon is indicator that
there is an SQL statement. There is a
command. So, we can go and check for
that for say if we have a semicolon in
email. So, what's going to happen? We're
going to print and we can say something
like this, SQL injection
and hacker attack. So, with that we get
some panic. Let's go and execute it now.
Now you can see in the output we are
getting the message, right? But still we
are processing it, which is really bad.
We have to add here a control flow
statements. So, again, continue or
break. Well, I would say I will not
trust the data at all that I'm getting
from this source. That's why I'm going
to stop everything and I'm going to go
and use a break in order to protect my
system. So, with that as you can see, we
are processing only the first two emails
and everything else going to be stopped.
As you can see in this example, we have
high critical risk in our system and we
use break [music] in this scenario.
Now, let's have a quick recap and
compare them side by sides. The first
statement is the break where we add a
condition and if this condition is
fulfilled, we execute the break and we
exit the loop. So, you are building like
an emergency exit if something goes
really wrong. That means all other
values will be totally ignored. We have
to exit immediately.
>> OH MY GOD, OKAY, it's happening.
EVERYBODY STAY CALM.
>> WHAT'S THE PROCEDURE, EVERYONE? WHAT'S
THE PROCEDURE?
>> WE USUALLY USE THIS ONLY FOR high
critical risks like for example,
security issues. As we learned about the
SQL injections, if you encounter this,
then you have to stop immediately,
otherwise you might destroy your system.
Now, moving on to the next one to the
continue, this one is not that dramatic.
If the condition is fulfilled, we're
going to say just skip this iteration
and go to the next one. We will not stop
the loop. And of course, we use this for
medium risks cases like empty data, bad
rows, empty files, and any other weird
special cases that you might encounter
and you say okay, just skip it. Now
finally to the chilliest one of the
three, we have the pass. So for this one
if the condition is fulfilled, it going
to say, you know what, just keep doing
what you are doing. Just execute the
codes and do your loop, do your thing.
So it is like a placeholder and you say,
you know what, I have planned for this
but for now, you know what, just keep
walking. Don't skip, don't stop
anything. So again, break if you have
something critical, go out now. Then
continue if you have a medium risk and
you say, skip this one. And the pass
it's just for the planning and you say,
do nothing.
So we use the else statement in order to
run a block of codes only if the for
loop finishes naturally, normally
without hitting a break. So all what we
are saying here, okay, I went through
the whole loop without any interruptions
and at the end I'm going to do something
extra. So let's understand what this
exactly means. Now as you remember, we
used already an else statement but
together with the if statement as we are
building the conditional logic. So we
use the if statement together with the
condition and if it is true, then we
print for example, okay. And then after
that we said, okay, if it is not true,
we could use the else statement in order
to define what going to happen if the
condition is false. And for example, we
say print not okay. So with that we used
else in order to define what going to
happen if the condition is not true. And
then based on the execution, either we
go to the right side or to the left
side. But now if you look to the for
statements, we said, okay, we have a
sequence and we going to repeat the same
code multiple times until we don't have
any value. And once the loop completed
and we went through all the items, then
we go and exit to the end. Now if you
look to this, you can see after the loop
ended successfully, we don't have
anything to do. It will just go and
exit. But now, instead of that, what we
can do, we can add an else statement.
So, we put it outside the for loop. It's
like you are doing if else, and then you
define what can happen. Like, for
example, print end. And with that, you
have defined an action that's going to
be executed once the loop is completed.
So, as you can see, it is not exactly
like the if else statements. In the if
else, we went either to the right or to
the left. With the for else, we're going
to do everything. We're going to iterate
through the whole loop, and as well, at
the end, we will be executing the else
as we are exiting to the end. So, now,
let's go deeper in order to understand
how this exactly works. So, again, we
have this example where we have the
three values, and now we add an else
statement where we print an end. So,
this block of code going to be executed
if we reached the last item. So, now, if
you go and execute it, the usual going
to happen. So, Python going to ask,
"Okay, what is the next item?" We will
get one, and then we're going to go and
print it. Then, ask again to the next
item, we will get two, then print it
again, and then to the last iteration,
and then it going to go and ask again
for the next item. We will get three and
print it in the output. As you can see,
so far, we didn't execute yet the else
statement because we are looping. Now,
going to go back to the top and ask
again, "What is the next item?" Iterator
going to say, "Stop." Cuz we don't have
anything left, and now the condition is
true. That's means Python going to exit
the loop. But before going to the end,
we still have an else statement. So,
Python has to execute now the else, and
we will get in the output an end. And
after that, it can go to the end and
stop everything. So, as you can see,
Python executed the else statement at
the end after it went through the whole
loop and iterated through all the values
in the sequence. So, this is exactly how
the else statement works with the for
loop. And okay, so, now, let's have a
very simple example. We're going to go
and create a classical for loop. So,
let's go and create few items like
numbers, 1 3 4 and 7 and then a very
simple loop. So, for I in items
and in the outputs we will print the I.
So, let's go and execute it. As you can
see, we have printed all the values in
our sequence. So, nothing fancy so far,
but now what we can do, we can go and
add an else statement. So, now let's go
to a new line and be careful, you have
to place the else at the same level as
the for, not inside the for loop. So,
we're going to say over here else double
points and let's print something like
loop is completed. Now, let's go and
execute it. Now, as you can see, at the
end of our iteration, we have this nice
message saying loop is completed. So,
this is actually how you add an else
statement to your loop, but here we have
an issue. Our code now makes no sense at
all because what we are doing here, we
are looping through the items and at the
end we are printing a message. Well,
actually the else here is totally
useless because what I can do, actually
I can go and remove it and it is just
simply like an instruction after the for
loop. So, after Python is done with the
loop, just go and print that loop is
completed. So, if you go and execute it,
you will get exactly same results. So,
actually having an else like this is
totally pointless and has no sense. And
now, of course, the question is, if this
is useless, then why we have an else
statement in the for loop? Well, my
friends, there is only one scenario
where the else statement makes sense if
you combine it with the break
statements. You have to combine the
break and the else in order to have a
real usage for the else statements. So,
let's understand [music] what this
means.
Okay, so now again back to our example.
As we have a normal for loop with a
break. Now, if you go and add an else
statement at the same level with the for
loop and we say for example print end.
So, with that we are adding a block of
code if we reached the last item in the
loop. So, if this is true, then print
the end and then exit. So, now let's see
how Python going to execute it. As
usual, Python going to ask for the first
item from the iterator. We will get one,
then it going to check the condition. Is
one equal to two? Well, it is false.
That's why it going to go to the print
and print one in the output. Then it
going to go back to the top and ask
again and give me the next item. It's
going to be two. Is two equal to two?
Well, this time our friend is going to
be true. And Python going to go to the
break statement and exit the loop. Exit
everything. And with that, my friend,
you will get in the output only one
value, the one. So, Python didn't
execute the next value in the iterator,
the three. And very important, Python
didn't execute the else statements. And
that's because, my friend, the condition
last item was never fulfilled. We didn't
get through. That's why Python didn't
has the chance to go and execute the
else statements. And this is exactly why
we need the else statements. We use it
as an indicator to understand whether we
iterated through all the items or we
encountered an interruption. So, as you
can see, the break and the else
statements, they work together in order
to define this logic. So, actually, it
looked like this now. We have a for
loop,
and we want to repeat something over and
over until the the loop is finished. And
once the loop is completely successful,
we do something else using the else
statements, and then go straight to the
end. So, this is the normal flow if
everything goes okay. Otherwise, we can
go and build an if statement that we
going to check in each iteration. And as
long as this condition is not fulfilled,
we stay in the loop. But if this
condition is fulfilled, then we make a
break in order to exit the loop and then
go straight to the end. So now, as I am
drawing this, the break statements
really work hand in hand [clears throat]
with the else statements, and they look
like exactly the FL statements. So,
either the loop is completed and we
execute the else statements, or the loop
is actually broken and we are exiting
using the break. So now, really I
understand now exactly why we are saying
else, cuz either it's broken or else it
is completed. And this is exactly, my
friends, why I love doing visuals,
because I understand then the logic how
things works. And this exactly what I do
usually. I draw the logic and then start
coding the solution. So now, back to our
example where the else statement is
totally useless, now we can make a usage
of it. I would like to go now and build
a check to understand whether in my list
we have an even number. And if we don't
have any even number, then we have to
print in the output that all the numbers
are odd. So, we have to go and make a
very simple if statements, and we going
to say if the remainder when we divide
the item by two is equal equal to zero,
then actually we found an even number.
So, we going to go and print something
like this. Instead of the I, we going to
say even number found, and then we going
to go and print this item. Now, after
that, we going to go and break the for
loop. And if we didn't find any even
numbers, that means all the numbers are
odd. So, we going to say all numbers are
odd. So, as you can see, it sounds like
an FL statements. Now, let's try this
out and execute. You can see even number
found, and we have the four. Let me just
add here a double points. So, what
happens here that Python did check the
first number one, well, it is not
fulfilling the condition and nothing
happened. Same thing for three, but for
the four we have a true, that's why
Python did execute this block of code.
So, it printed the message and then
executed the break. That means
everything stops. And in this scenario,
Python will not execute the else
statement. Again, the else statement
going to be executed if Python did
manage to iterate through all the items
completely without hitting the break.
So, that's why in the output you don't
find this message over here. Now, let's
go and test something else where we
going to have all numbers are odd like
this. So, we don't have an even number
and then execute. You can see in the
output we get all numbers are odds. So,
that means Python did try all those
numbers and none of them fulfilled this
condition over here. So, it didn't
manage to execute the break. That's why
the loop was completed and Python did
execute the else statements. So, now as
you can see, the else statement here is
totally useful. We use it in order to
understand that Python did iterate
through all the items and Python did it
execute the break and we didn't have any
interruptions. And as you can see, it
only works if you combine it with a
break statement. [music]
And now we come to the question of that,
why do we need those stuff and when we
going to use it in real projects? Well,
the main use case is that we use it in
order to search and validate our data.
As we are getting new data, we have to
search for bad data and report at the
end whether everything is clean or
whether we found some bad data and bad
quality. So, let me show you now some
real use cases. Okay, so now let's have
an example. Let's say that I have a list
of names and I would like to check
whether we have any missing values. So,
let's have a very simple list of names
like for example, Kamara,
Anj, then Tuba. And the third one is
actually missing. We have a none. And
the last name going to be Monica.
Okay, so now I would like to go and
check whether we have any missing
values. For that, we have to go and
iterate through the list. So, we have to
go and create a for loop. For name in
names, double points. Now, we're going
to go and build a condition in order to
check whether the name is empty. And for
that, we're going to use an if
statement. So, if the name is none, then
what we're going to do? We're going to
go and print a message. We're going to
say found a missing name. And after
that, we don't want to continue. We have
already found an issue in the data, and
that's enough for now. So, I want to
stop and exit the loop. Now, let's say
that we have checked all the names and
we didn't this condition. So, we didn't
find any missing values. Now, I would
like to print a message saying that
everything is okay. And for that, my
friends, we use an else statement. We're
going to say all names are available.
Okay, let's try this out and execute.
And now, in the output, you can see
found a missing name. That means it is
working because we have here the third
value as a none, and this made our
condition fulfilled and activated the
print found missing a name and as well
the break. Now, let's try another thing
like, for example, we go and add a name
here like Maria. And then, let's go and
execute. You can see in the output we
are getting all names are available
because all names are there and this
condition is never fulfilled. And since
we iterated through all the values of
our list successfully, we got at the end
this print message from the else
statement. So, as you can see, we are
using the break together with the else
statement in order to search for
something and validate our data. And
this is something that is very common as
you are doing data quality checks and
quality assurance. Okay, so now, let's
have another example where we use this.
Let's say that I would like to check
whether all my files are CSV. So, that
means we have to validate the type of
the file and this is something that
happens a lot as you process files.
Okay, so now, as usual, we start with an
example. Let's have few data. Like, for
example, we have a file name called data
one CSV. Another one we have report
maybe PDF and the last one let's say
that report dot CSV. So now as you can
see not all my files are CSV. We have
one of them as PDF which is not really
good. Now we have to check that. So we
can go and create a for loop for file in
files. So now we're going to go and
create our checkpoints and we are
checking the files. What we are
searching for is actually the last
character of each string. So that means
we're going to go and use the methods
ends with and we have to pass for it our
expectation. So it's going to be dot CSV
but actually we are searching for bad
data. So that means we have to search
whether the file does not end with CSV.
So we have to add the not operator. So
what happens if your file is not CSV?
First we're going to print a nice
message and we're going to say for
example, let's print the file name. So
the file is not a CSV. After that we
want to break. So we found something
that is not correct and we end the loop.
Now otherwise if everything is fine we
have to just print successful message.
So else print all files are CSV. So now
let's try this out. As you can see we
are getting a report dot PDF is not a
CSV and that's because it is fulfilling
this condition and this block of code is
executed. Now let's try the other one.
So if you remove the PDF to CSV and
execute you can see all the files are
CSV. So as you can see again we use the
break together with the else in order to
check the quality of our data. And now
there is like one thing that I would
like to show you. If we say okay this is
a PDF and we have another one let's say
it is data two dot txt. So we have two
cases where it is bad. Now if you go and
execute it as you can see we are getting
in the output only one. So report dot
PDF is not a CSV. So, once we cached the
first issue, the Python going to break
the loop. So, actually, we are not
getting the second file over here. And
that's because the loop stops. But now,
if you say, "You know what? We can get
as well the second one." If you remove
the break and you say, "You know what?
Let's go and use the continue." Well,
let's see what going to happen if you do
that. And now, if you're looking to the
output, now we are getting the two
files, report.pdf and data2.txt.
But the issue we are getting this as
well, all files are CSV, which is not
correct. So, actually, this makes no
sense. And that's because you cannot
combine the continue with the else. It
going to work only if you use break. So,
the continue, what going to happen, it
will just skip one iteration. It will
not stop the whole for loop. So,
actually, you cannot do that. It makes
for me no sense. You have to go and use
a break over here. And with that, you
will get only one file. If you are not
happy about it, you can just go and say
here,
"Not all files are CSV." And then,
execute it. So, that we are not
reporting as well where we have the
issue. So, this is how we work with the
break and the else statements with the
for loops.
And now, my friends, as usual, I will
not leave you without a challenge. And
we have a tricky one. So, the challenge
says, "Check the following list of file
names and find out whether we have
duplicates or not. So, if you found
duplicates, you have to tell us about
it. Otherwise, if everything is fine,
just say all files are unique." Now, I'm
really interested to see how you're
going to solve it. So, let's go. All
right.
All right, friends. So, now we're going
to talk about something called nested
for loop. A nested for loop, it is very
simple. We have a loop inside another
loop. So, that means we have a big loop,
we call it the outer loop. And for each
run of this big loop, we're going to run
completely smaller loop. And we call
this one an inner loop. And once this
small loop is completed, we go to the
next iteration of the outer loop, and
the same thing going to happen. We're
going to run again completely this small
inner loop. And again, once the smaller
one is completed, we run one more
iteration for the bigger loop. And of
course, we can keep nesting loops inside
another loop. So, we could have like
very small loop inside the middle one.
So, this is exactly what we mean with
the loop inside another loop. So, now
let's see how we're going to build it.
Now, we have this classical for loop,
nothing fancy. We are just iterating
through a sequence. Now, in order to
make a nested loop, we define a new for
loop, but inside the first one. So, for
example, for Y in a sequence like one,
two. And let's call the first one an X,
so it sounds better. And with that, we
are iterating through two loop
variables, the X and the Y. And we are
printing both of them, the X and the Y.
Now, about the chart, Python kind of has
like two loops. So, they are connected
like this, but we are not finished yet.
Once we reach the end of the second
loop, it will go back to the start of
the first loop. And of course, once
everything is completed, we will go to
the end. So, as you can see, the start
and the end of the second for loop is
actually completely connected to the
first loop. And again, we call the whole
block as the outer loop, and the block
of code that is inside it, we call it an
inner loop, so the second loop. Okay, so
now, once you execute it, Python has to
go and create two iterators, one for the
outer loop, and another one for the
inner loop. So, now, Python start with
the outer loop, and ask for the next
item, and iterator going to answer with
one. Since we are getting a value, we
are not at the end. That's why Python
now has to go and start the inner loop.
So, here Python going to ask for the
next item in the second iterator in the
inner loop. [clears throat] And here as
well, we will get one. So, since we are
getting a value, we are not at the end,
and now Python has to go and finally
execute the block of code print. So, now
in the print, the X is assigned to one,
the Y is assigned to one as well. That's
why in the output you will see 1 1. And
now Python will go and start from the
top of the inner loop, and it going to
ask for the second item of the inner
iterator. We will get two, and since we
are getting value, we are not done yet
with the inner loop. So, it's going to
go and print. So, the X is equal to one,
but now Y is equal to two. That's why
you will see in the output 1 2. So, now
it's going to go to the top of the inner
loop and ask, "Give me the next item."
Now the inner iterator going to answer
with a stop because we are at the end.
So, with that, Python going to go and
exit the inner loop and go to the end.
But of course, we are not at the end
actually. We will go to the top of the
first loop. So, everything that we have
done so far, that was only for the first
item of the outer loop. Now Python going
to go and ask the outer iterator for the
next item. It's going to be two, and
guess what? Two is not the last item of
the outer loop. That's why it's going to
go and start again completely the inner
loop. So, the inner iterator going to
answer with one, and you will have in
the print now X is equal to two because
the outer loop has the value two, and
the Y is one. So, you will have two and
one, and then the next value two two,
and the inner loop going to be done,
then exit again the inner loop, but you
have to go again to the top of the first
loop. And the same thing happen. You
will go to the third value, do the whole
inner iteration, and then go back to the
top of the loop. So, as you can see,
this is the third time we are executing
the inner loop. And now Python going to
ask for the outer
give me the next item. The iterator
going to say, "Stop. I don't have
anything left." And finally, you will
exit the outer loop and go to the end.
And now, we are at the end of the outer
loop, and everything is stops. So, this
is exactly how Python executes the
nested loops. Okay, so let's have very
simple example. We going to start with
the outer loop for X in range. Let
generate like, for example, three
numbers. This is our outer loop, our big
loop. Now, inside it, we can add another
loop. So, for Y in range, and this time,
for the smaller one, let's go with two
iterations, so two numbers. This is our
inner loop. And now, we going to go
inside the inner loop and print. So, I'm
going to print, for example, between two
parentheses, we going to have the first
variable, the X, and then separated with
a comma, and then the second variable.
So, something like this. Let's go and
execute it. Now, as you can see, for
each value from the outer loop, we have
two rows. So, 0 0 0 1, then 1 0 1 1, and
for the last one, 2 0 2 1. So, that's
it. As you can see, very simple. This is
how you can nest two loops inside each
others. And of course, you can go and
add a third loop, like, for example, for
Z in range. Let's add as well two. So,
now we have to be careful. This print
should be inside the third for loop. And
here, we going to go and add our third
variable, the Z. So now, let's go and
execute it. Now, as you can see, we are
getting like a matrix of numbers. So, as
you can see, we have a loop inside the
loop inside the loop. This [music] is
really easy.
Okay, so now we come to the real talk.
Why do we need those stuff? When we
going to use nested loops in our data
projects? And for that, we have actually
two major use cases. The first use case
is for crossing and combining our data
or we call it pairing the data. So, it's
all about we have two different lists
and I would like to see all possible
combinations of those two lists. So,
that means I'm going to go and combine
and pair each value from one list with
the other values of the other list.
Okay, so now let's have an example where
we have two completely different lists.
The first one going to be the colors.
So, we have reds, we have blue and
green. And another list it is about the
sizes. So, we have stuff like maybe L,
M, and S. Now, let's say that I would
like to go and generate maybe a product
catalog with all combinations of colors
and sizes. So, I want to pair each color
with each size. Now, in order to do that
we can use the nested loops and here it
doesn't matter where you start. Like,
for example, let's start with the
colors. So, for color in colors next to
be about the size as an inner loop. So,
for size in sizes. Now, all what you
have to do is to go and just print those
two variables. So, print where we're
going to have something maybe like this.
Maybe the first variable going to be the
color and then after that I'm going to
say size and we have the variable here
size. So, now let's go and execute it.
As you can see for each color I'm
getting all the sizes. So, for the red,
the blue, and the green. So, this is
what we call sometimes Cartesian or
cross or combining the data where you
pair all values with all values. So,
this is a nice use case for the nested
loops. Okay, so now moving on to the
second use case and the most important
one, we use it in order to go through
layers or we call it drilling into
hierarchy. Let's have this sketch to
understand this. Okay, the first example
that we have hierarchy in the dates.
Like, for example, we start with the
years, 2026 and 2027. Now, for this we
could make a for loop in order to
iterate through all the years, and this
we consider as the first level. And now
we could drill down into more details if
we go to the months, so that means we
add another loop inside the year, for
month in months. So, we are at the
second level. Now, we can go deeper
where we go to the days. We are now at
the lowest level at the level three,
where we add a third loop where we say,
for day in days. And after that, we have
to go and do something about all those
three informations. So, as you can see,
we are using nested for loop in order to
go through different layers in order to
drill down into hierarchy. Let's have an
example. Now, let's have an example.
Let's say that I have to go and create
multiple reports for each year, for each
month, and as well for each day. And
now, instead of doing it manually, we
can go and create for loops. So, as
usual, let's go and create our data. So,
we're going to start with the years. So,
let's say 2026 and 2027.
And the next level going to be the
months,
where let's say that we have only two,
for example, January and February.
And the last level, the days, I will go
and generate it using the range. So, it
start with one and ends with, yeah, 29.
So, now I have all my data, and all what
you have to do is now just to go and
create the for loops. So, the first one
going to be for the years, for Y in
years. The next one is for M in months,
and the last one for the days, for D in
days. Now, we have our nested loops, the
three loops. And all that you have to
do, for example, let's go and just print
the file name. So, it's going to be F,
and the naming convention start with
report underscore, and then the year.
So, I'm going to go and get the variable
of the year, then the month, so the M,
and the last one going to be the day, D.
And as I said, we are creating CSV
files. So, actually, that's it. Let's go
and try this out and execute. So, now in
the output we're going to get a huge
list because we have here a lot of days.
So, we are going to have all those file
names that combines the year, month, and
days. And of course, we're going to
learn later how to create files, but for
now we are just printing it. So, look at
this. With just few lines of codes, you
can generate massive amount of data, and
as well, you're going to save a lot of
manual work. And this is exactly why we
are learning about the loops. And
another example for this use case, and
this one is very common as you are
working with data, we navigate through
tables and columns. So, if you know some
database concepts, you know that we
store our data inside tables, columns,
and rows. So, the table going to be the
highest in the hierarchy, and if you
drill down to the next level, you go to
the columns. So, each table contains
multiple columns. And now, if you want
to go deeper, you go to the rows, to the
actual data. And in order to navigate
through this hierarchy, we could use
nested loops. So, for the first level,
we could have like for table in tables,
then we drill down to the second level
for column in columns, and then to the
last level where we say for row in rows.
And at the end, as usual, we have to do
something like maybe cleaning up the
data, doing different preparations and
manipulations to the data depends on
what you are doing. And this setup you
see now, those three different nested
for loops, it's something that you going
to do in each data projects. So, if I
open now my projects, I'm always going
to see those comprehensions where I'm
iterating through the tables, then the
columns, and then the rows, and then
doing something. And so, now I'm going
to show you an example that I just used
in my project last week, and I was
running an SQL query on multiple tables
and columns just to check whether we
have nulls in the tables. And now of
course we will not talk about the SQL
query itself. It's all about that I had
huge list of tables and columns. And if
I'm going to go and write those queries
manually, it's going to take really a
lot of time. Now instead of that, I just
wrote few line of codes in Python and it
solved the task. So let me show you how
I solved it. It is very simple. First
we're going to go and create a list of
all tables that we are interested in. So
let's say we have the customers, we have
orders and products. So here we make a
list of all tables that I would like to
query. And here for example the prices.
Then next I need the columns that
actually I am checking. So we're going
to make another list for the columns.
And here I was checking only for the IDs
and the creation dates. So those two
columns are actually part of all my
tables. And then I made really nice two
nested loops. So I said for T in tables,
for C in columns. And now what we're
going to do, we're going to take the
query over here and add for it the
variables. So I just made a print and
then we start writing the query. So
select count star from. But now instead
of saying customers, I would like to get
the variable from the list. So instead
of this one, we're going to have the
dynamic table name. It's going to be the
T. And after that we have the static
part. We have the where and then we have
the column name. And again I will not
make it static. I'm going to go and get
it actually from my list. The last part
is actually static. So is null and then
the semicolon. So as you can see I have
converted my query into a dynamic query.
Now let's go and execute it. As you can
see in the output, I have automated
everything. I got all my queries and for
each table we have two queries, one for
the ID and another one for the create
dates. And with that I don't have to
write anything anymore manually. I could
just make few lines in Python in order
to automate the whole job. And if I got
in the future more tables and columns,
I'm just going to go and extend it over
here, and then automatically generate my
SQL query. And I know this sounds really
simple, but this is what advanced data
engineers actually do. Especially if
they are building systems like data
warehouse, data lake, data lakehouse, we
will be dealing with huge amount of
tables and columns, and you cannot go
hardcode everything. So, you have to
load the tables from A to B. You cannot
go and script something for each table.
Instead, we build something called
metadata-driven pipelines. We do exactly
what we have done in this example, where
we write the metadata, table names, the
columns, and as well the data types, and
so on in variables and key values, and
then we make a script like this over
here, where we iterate through the
metadata, and we do something like maybe
copying the tables, changing the schema,
doing few preparations. And with that,
you will be saving as a data engineer,
or maybe as a data analyst, if you are
doing something huge in many tables. You
save, my friend, a lot of time, and I
use it many times in my projects. So, I
know we are talking about the nested for
loops, but this is something very
advanced, and they're going to make your
work highly automated. And another
example about hierarchy in real data
projects that if you are working with
data lakes, like for example, if you are
storing data in Azure, you might have
like some containers, and inside each
container, there will be different
folders, and inside those folders,
you're going to find different files.
And of course, my friends, we use a
nested for loops in order to navigate
through this hierarchy, so that we reach
those files, and then we load them maybe
to somewhere else, or we do some
transformations. This is something that
you're going to do a lot if you are
analyzing those files, or you are doing
some data engineering about it. Of
course, there are many other examples
that you can encounter, but the rule is
very simple. If you have different
layers, different levels, and you have
like hierarchy, you will end up, my
friend, using nested loop in order to
navigate through the structure.
So, now we're going to talk about the
second type [music] of looping in
Python. We going to talk about the while
loop. So, what is a while loop? We use
it in order to repeat the same code over
and over as long as a condition is true.
So, this sounds like the for loop,
right? Now, what are the differences
between for loop and while loop? Here's
the deal. With the for loop, we have
understood that Python going to go and
create internally an iterator and as
well a condition that keep checking
whether we are at the last item of the
iterator. And as long we have values
from the iterator, we keep looping
through the for loop. And once we don't
have any more values, we go to the end.
Now, there is like two issues with this
setup. The first one is that we are
always predefining the sequence. So,
before we start iterating, we know
exactly that we have here three
iterations. So, it start with the one
and ends with the three. And we know we
going to iterate three times. So, we
know exactly how many times we going to
iterate. The second issue is that this
condition in the middle is as well
something predefined from Python and we
cannot change it. So, it's always about
whether we are at the end of the
sequence. And this is exactly why we
have the second type of looping. We have
the while loop. So, this time we going
to define our own condition for the
iteration. And if our condition is true,
then we going to go and do something and
go back to the top. So, that means as
long as our condition is true, we will
keep looping and iterating. But the
moment our condition is not any more
true, it is false, then we going to exit
the loop. The big advantage is that we
define our own loop. So, with that we
have more freedom and flexibility. So,
we don't know up front how many times it
will go. It is all about our condition.
And this sounds, of course, risky
because we might end up easily in an
infinite loop. So, now by looking to
those two side by side, the difference
is very simple. With the for loop, we
are iterating over a sequence, like a
range, a list. So, we are looping over
something known. But with the while
loop, we are iterating and looping over
a condition that could change anytime.
So, now let's dig deeper into the while
loop. Now, for the while loop, we have
as well, like the for loop, different
designs and types. And I'm going to put
them into two categories. The first one
we call it the while condition. So, you
define a condition and the loop going to
keep going until the condition becomes
false. So, this is the classical type,
but we have another design we call it
the while true. So, this loop going to
run forever. It is infinite. That's why
we add to it together with a break
statement in order to force the loop to
stop. And of course, there is a reason
for that. So, those are the two main
categories and we going to start with
the first one, the classical one, the
while condition.
>> [music]
>> So, now we going to start with a very
famous use case where we build a counter
using the while loop. We start with the
keyword while and then we define a
condition, like for example, I should be
smaller than four. And once you do that,
Python going to go and create for you a
condition. And as usual, for each
condition we have either true or false.
Now, since this is a while loop, false
means we going to go to the end. But if
it is true, we need to do something.
This something could be, like for
example, print the I. Now, if you do it
like this, after the action is done, it
going to go back to the top of the loop.
So, it is like two lines similar to the
for loop. If you go and execute it, you
will get an error because Python don't
know what I is. So, we have always to
assign it first to a value before the
loop. And of course, we call this
initialization
of the while loop. Now, once you do
that, it's going to put it of course
before the loop starts because we are
outside of the loop. So, now let's see
how Python going to execute it. First,
it's going to go and execute I is equal
to 1. So, it's going to create a
variable and assign for it the value 1
and then enters the loop. So, now it's
going to go and check, "Okay, is I
smaller than 4?" Well, it is true.
That's why it's going to go and print
the I in the output and then go back to
the top of the loop and then ask again,
"Is I smaller than 4?" Well, nothing
changed, my friend. The I still equal to
1 and it's going to fulfill the
condition and then going to go print it
again and go again to the top of the
loop and going to ask again, "Is I still
smaller than 4?" Well, of course. So, as
you can see, it's going to keep looping.
We are stuck in infinite loop because we
never changed the value of I and the
condition is always true. That's why it
will never stop until it kills your PC.
That's why we have to add a new line
inside our while loop in order to give
the chance for the I to change. Like for
example, we could update it by adding a
one to the value so that the value get
incremented by each iteration and we
have like a counter. So, now let's see
how Python going to execute it. First,
it's going to start with the
initialization. So, it's going to assign
one to the I and then it's going to go
and enter the loop. It's going to go and
ask, "Is I smaller than 4?" Well, it is
true. That's why it's going to go to the
print and print the current value is
one. Now, next Python going to go to the
second step and add the value one to the
variable. So, 1 + 1 we will get two and
then assign it to the variable I. Now,
going to go to the top, but this time we
have a new value for the I. So, is two
smaller than four? Well, it is true.
That's why it's going to go to the
print, print it in the output two, and
then update the value again. We're going
to have now three in the variables and
then go back to the top. Is three
smaller than four? Yes. Go print it in
the output and update it. So, now our
variable is equal to four and then go
back to the top. Now, it's going to ask
is four smaller than four? Well, this is
false. And finally, now Python going to
break the loop and go to the end and
exit. So, as you can see, Python will
keep looping and iterating as long as
our condition is true until the
condition change and turns to false. And
this is the only way to exit our loop.
And this is how we build a counter in
Python using the while loop. So, now if
you look again to the code, we have here
three sections. The first one, outside
of the while loop, we have something
called initialization, where you define
the initial value of the loop variable.
And then, after the while, you define
your condition. And now, inside the
loop, you do the thing that you want.
But, the third component that is very
important, you have to build an update
mechanism. So, you have to change the
value that we are checking in your
condition. So, if you don't do those
three steps, either the loop will not
work or you will be stuck in infinite
loop. And by the way, my friends, if you
are enjoying this type of free tutorials
where I'm sketching the concepts behind
the scenes and showing the codes, and
you would like to see more like this,
then support the channel by subscribing,
liking, commenting. This really helps a
lot. So, now let's go back. So, now
let's build a counter that's going to
count from one to five. Let's start
first with the variable, the
initialization. So, we're going to
assign for it the one. And after that,
we're going to go and build our while
loop. And now, we're going to build our
condition. So, as long as the counter is
smaller or equal to five, we have to
iterate and loop. So, we're going to
say, "Okay, print the count." And now,
the last step we don't have to forget
about making the update mechanism. So,
we're just going to go and add a one for
it. And actually, that's it. Let's go
and execute it. Now, if you look to the
output, you can see we have a counter
that counts from one to five. So, with
that, we have a nice counter. And of
course, we can control now with those
values the whole counter. We could make
the step of two. So, now if you go and
execute it, you will get in the output 1
3 5. So, we have now bigger steps. Or we
can say we're going to count until 10,
not to five. So, with those values, we
could control the whole counter. And
this is what we call counter-based loop.
Okay, now let's take things to the next
level. Now, look to our loop variable
over here. This variable is getting the
value from our code. It is something
hard-coded, and it start with a one. So,
there is no surprise how things going to
work over here. But, we can make things
more dynamic, where we ask the user for
a value, and then we check it. And based
on the user's input, we decide whether
we continue in the loop or we exit. Like
for example, you are building a system
that ask a very simple question to the
user, "Do you agree?" And the system
going to expect from the user only yes,
nothing else. So, if the user answers
like no, maybe, or I will think about
it, it will not accept it. So, we accept
only yes, only if you agree with the
system. So, it sound little bit like the
system is interrogating a user, and it
only accept yes. So, now how we going to
do it? First, let's go and build a
variable like the answer. And at the
start, it's going to be empty. So, now
let's go and build a condition like this
with a while loop where you're going to
say if the answer from the user is not
equal to what I want to hear, the yes,
then ask again. And in order to ask,
actually, we're going to go and use the
function input in order to get a value
from the user. And you're going to say,
"Do you agree?" And then we're going to
give the answers, yes or no. Then double
points. Actually, that's it. That's all
about the loop. Not make anything
incremental. So, all what you are doing
is we're going to ask the user for a
value, then we're going to evaluate it.
If it is not equal to yes, we keep
asking. So, the system going to end up
in infinite loop until it hears yes.
Now, let's go and maybe print as well
outside of the loop something like,
"Thank you."
So, now let's try this out and execute.
So, now the system is asking very
politely, "Do you agree? Yes or no?" The
user might say, "You know what? I don't
agree." Now, the system going to ask
again, "Do you agree? Yes or no?" And
maybe the user says, "You know what?
Maybe. I don't know." And as you can
see, the system is keep asking because
the condition over here is fulfilled.
The answer is not equal to yes, and we
will stay in this loop until we hear
yes, until the condition is not anymore
fulfilled. So, now the system is asking
for third time, "Do you agree?" Well,
this time maybe the user is going to be
scared a little bit and say, "Yes." And
with that, you will get the thank you.
And that's because we broke the loop.
The condition is not anymore fulfilled,
and we went outside and printed the
thank you. So, as you can see, it is
very simple. All what you have to do is
to have a looping variable like here the
answer, then you build a condition on
top of it, and then you make sure inside
each iteration there is possibility to
change the value. If you don't do that,
otherwise you will be stucking in an
infinite loop.
All right. So, that's all about the
while condition, the first type. Now
we're going to go to the second type,
the while true. This one going to be the
most powerful, but yet the most risky.
So let's dive in. We're going to build
it like this. We start with the keyword
while, and then after that we use the
value, the Boolean value true. So there
is no condition, no counter, no nothing.
It's just the Boolean expression true.
And inside the loop we're going to do
something. So now in the charts going to
be like this. Python going to say,
"Okay, while true." And this time we
don't have like two answers. We are not
checking anything. So we don't have a
false and true. It will be always true.
So there is no escape from this to the
end. Now if you just leave it like this
and execute it, what's going to happen?
You will be stuck in in infinite loop.
So that's why we have to build somehow
an exit in order to give it a chance to
stop the loop. And in order to do that,
we're going to go and add a second
condition using the if statements. For
example, X is equal to the word stop.
And if this condition is false, it's
going to go to the top of the loop. But
if it is true, we have to do something.
So think about it. What we could add
here in order to exit a loop? Well, as
we learned, we have the three statements
in order to control the loops. And here
we're going to go and use the break. It
is our only chance to stop the loop. So
we're going to go and include it inside
the if statements. If it is true the
value is equal to stop, then we're going
to go to the break and stop the whole
thing. Now of course there are multiple
ways on how to get a value for this
variable, but we could ask the user for
a value using the input function. So we
ask the user for a value and then we
check this value using the if
statements. So now let's see how Python
going to execute it. Python going to
start by the true and here there is
nothing to be decided. So it's going to
go immediately and enter the loop. So
here it's going to go and ask for user
for a value. Let's say our user entered
high. So, Python going to assign high
for the X and then go to the next step
and ask about it. So, is high equal
equal to stop? Well, no. So, we didn't
get a stop from the user. That's why
Python going to go to the top of the
loop and repeat the whole thing again.
Maybe on the way we are printing or
doing anything. So, again Python going
to see, okay, this is true, so I can
keep going in the loop and then ask the
user for another value. And here the
user going to give us the value go. And
in the next step Python going to check
it. Is go equal to stop? Well, it is
not. That's why it is false. That's why
we're going to stay in the loop and then
go back to the top after doing
something. And here again we have true
and then ask the user for again a new
value. Now finally, let's say the user
says, "Okay, I am done." and give us the
stop. So, now Python going to go and
check, did we get stop from the user?
Well, yes. Finally, we got the flag from
the user that we are done. And with
that, Python going to go to the break
and execute it. And this is the point
where Python going to say, "Oh, we have
break. We have to exit. We have to stop
everything immediately and end our
loop." So, as you can see, this is
another way on how to build a loop. So,
you build an infinite loop and then you
add to it an if statement together with
a break because this is your only chance
to stop and exit the infinite loop.
Otherwise, you're going to stuck in a
black hole. So, my friends, this is very
risky, but if you do it correctly,
everything going to be fine. Oh, I have
to fix this first. So,
something like this.
Okay, I know you want to try the
infinite loop, right? But first, a
disclaimer. Only run the following
statements if your machine can handle
it. So, only if you have strong CPU, you
have saved your work, and you are ready
to restart your PC. So, now let's go and
build our infinite loop. So, we're going
to say while true and we're going to
print something
like I am unstoppable.
So, something like this. And again, here
warning, if you execute it, your things
might crash. If you stuck with it, just
eliminate it using the control C. Now,
I'm going to try this out, and I hope I
will not break the recording. So, um
we'll go. Now, as you can see, it is
executing. So, control C and stop it.
And now it is stopped, but I still hear
the PC was not happy about it. Okay, so
this is how we do with the infinite
loop. I don't know if you are still up
there here,
but I hope you are happy. Okay, now back
to our task where we keep asking the
user to type yes to agree with us until
they do. Previously, we have solved it
using the classical while with a
condition, but this time I'm going to go
and solve it using the while true. So,
we're going to start with a while, and
after that, we don't need condition. We
will just say true double points. And by
the way, make sure the first character
is capitalized. And then after that, we
go immediately and say we have a
variable called answer. So, that is it's
not like before where we have like
initialization at the start. We don't
need that with the while loop because
previously we have the answer in the
condition, and if you don't give it like
any value, you will get an error. But
here, we are not checking anything yet.
So, that's why we don't have to define
anything outside. And the same thing,
we're going to ask for an input. I'm
just going to go and copy this from
here. So, with that, we will get a value
from our user, but we have to check it,
right? Otherwise, it will not work.
order to check it, we're going to use
the if statement, and we're going to say
if the answer is equal equal to yes, and
then double points. So, now as you can
see, this time we are checking whether
the value is yes, not like here, right?
Now, if the answer is yes, what going to
happen? We don't have to ask anymore. We
got what we want, and we break. So, we
break the loop and get out. And of Of we
can put at the end like print. So, we
exit and get out of our while loop. And
of course, at the end, completely
outside the loop, we can say, "Thank
you." So, now let's try this out. I will
just go and comment this out. And let's
go and execute it. So, as you can see,
we are getting the same question, "Do
you agree?" If you say, "No." you're
still going to get the same question.
"Maybe. I don't know." So, with that, as
long as we are not fulfilling this
condition, Python will keep asking. So,
currently we are inside an infinite
loop, and we will not exit and break
until we give the yes. So, now if I go
and give it a yes, it's going to be
happy and say, "Thank you." So, as you
can see now, the system is behaving
exactly like the while condition. And
for this scenario, I'm going to go with
the while true because it is easier to
read. So, we are building an infinite
loop, and we keep repeating that until
we get the right answer.
So, now if you compare the two types
side by side, you can see with the while
condition, we know when the loop should
stop. We have like something limited
that going to end the loop naturally.
But with the while loop, it's going to
run forever. It is infinite until
something happens, until an event
trigger the stop. So, that means with
the while condition, things can end
naturally. But with the while true, you
have always to add extra stuff like a
condition using the if together with the
break. This is your only possibility to
stop the loop. And if you are talking
the risk of having infinite loop, the
while condition it is safer. Eventually,
it's going to exit unless you made like
a big mistake. But with the while true,
it is more risky because you are
defining an infinite loop, and you have
to be careful designing the if and the
break. And as we learned, the best use
cases for the while condition, if you
are building like a counter, or you are
building a limited retries, or you are
validating the output from the user. But
on the other side, we use the while true
if you have an open-end scenario and you
are trying to get a trigger from
something external, like you are trying
to connect to database, to stream, to
APIs. So, at the end, I'm going to say
always try to build things using the
while condition, but if you want
something more advanced, more flexible,
something that is open-ended, then you
have to use the while true, but be
careful how you build it.
Now, we're going to compare the two
types of loops, the for loop and the
while loop side by side. With the for
loop, you need a sequence where Python
going to go and create an object called
iterator, but with the while loop, you
don't need anything like that. And for
the for loop, Python going to build like
predefined condition. It going to ask
always, are we done with the sequence?
It's not something that you change, but
with the while loop, you are totally
flexible. You can add your own condition
for the iterations. Now, about when to
use what, we use the for loop if we know
already how many times we want to loop.
And as we learned, we use the for loop
in order to go through our data to do
something, like we loop over the rows,
the tables, the columns, the files in
order to clean up or prepare the data.
But now, in the other hand, with the
while loop, we use it if we don't know
how many times we want to iterate. We
are waiting for an event, a trigger, a
condition. So, we use it if you are
building like retries in the login or
you are trying to connect yourself to a
database or APIs. Now, the advantage of
using the for loop is that it is simple,
clear, and it is really hard to make an
infinite loop with the for loop, so it
is really safe. But of course, it is
limited. You have always to predefine
how many times you want to iterate. But
in the other hand, with the while loop,
it is more advanced, more flexible. It
adds dynamic to your logic, but it is
complex and you have a high risk of
building an infinite loop. So, at the
end, think of the for loop as like you
have a playlist, you know exactly how
many songs you have, and the while loop
you are waiting for a reply, you keep
checking until the condition is met. So,
that's all about when to use what.
Okay, so now time to challenge you a
little bit. Now, I want you to extend
the current loop with the new
requirements. The first one is to limit
the user to three attempts in total. So,
if you don't get yes from three
attempts, you don't ask any more. If the
user type yes within the three attempts,
then you have to print the following
message, "Glad we are on the same page."
But, if the user didn't give us a yes
within the three attempts, you have to
print, "Three strikes, you are out." So,
now pause the video, solve those
requirements, and then we're going to do
it together. Okay, so now how we're
going to solve it? Now, as you can see,
the first requirement is that we have to
add like only three attempts. So, now
currently it is open-ended. We keep
repeating the same question until we get
what we want. But, now with the new
requirements, we have to make it
limited, and with that, we can rethink
about maybe we go back to the classical
while condition. I know that we're going
to iterate a maximum three times, and
for this, I'm going to say we go back to
the normal while condition. So, that
means we're going to go and replace the
true with a condition, and we're going
to say as long as the attempts less than
three times, you have to keep asking the
same question. But, of course, we have
to do the step before the while where we
do the initialization. So, we're going
to assign attempts to a zero. So, this
is the initial value, this is our
condition, and of course, what is
missing, my friends? We have to make the
updates. So, for each iteration, we have
to increase the attempts, and usually
we're going to put it at the end before
the next iteration. So, we're going to
say attempts
plus equal to one. So, that I increase
the attempts with one. So, with that we
made the three attempts. Now, for the
next requirement we're going to say if
the user did answer with yes within the
three attempts, we have to print this
message. So, again in our logic what we
are saying, get me a value from the user
and if the value is yes, then break. So,
that means this is a perfect place in
order to print this message. So, not
only breaking out of the loop, we would
like to give this nice message where we
can print, "Glad we are on the same
page."
After that, we break and then we
increase the attempts. Okay, so now
let's go and try this out. So, now first
I would like to test whether the
attempts are working the new logic. That
means the system should not ask me more
than three times, not more than three
iterations. Now, I'm going to say no,
then ask me again, maybe I don't know,
and now should exit. Exactly, this is
what happens. We exit because we are not
any more fulfilling this condition. So,
we are exiting the loop normally without
using the break. We had three iterations
because the attempts were smaller than
three, but for the fourth iteration the
attempts were equal to three and three
is not less than three. That's why it is
not fulfilling any more the condition
and we exited the while loop normally.
Now, let's go and test whether this
going to work over here. If we get yes,
it going to break and give us this
message. So, let's say for the first one
it was no, but for the second one we
have yes. As you can see, the system
didn't ask us for a third time because
we fulfilled this condition inside the
while loop. The answer from the user is
yes and and we fulfilled this condition.
That's why we entered to this block
where Python printed the message and
then executed the break. So, that means
the while loop stops because of the
break, not because we are not fulfilling
the condition anymore. So, we didn't
exit normally, we exited using the
emergency break. Okay, so now let's talk
about the last requirement. Otherwise,
we have to print this message, "Three
strikes, you are out." That means if I'm
not getting yes, we should print this
message. Well, you might say, "You know
what? Let's go and get this one instead
of the thank you." We don't need the
thank you anymore. And if we didn't exit
with the break, we will get this
message. Okay, so now let's try this
out. I'm going to say no, no, and no.
Now, as you can see, it is working, so
we are getting, "Okay, three strikes,
you are out. We didn't get a yes from
you." But my friends, this will not work
if we have a yes. So, let me show you
what I mean. Let's say, "Okay, first
time no, but the second time we say
yes." Now we have an issue. We have the
two options together. So, it is saying,
"Glad we are on the same page." And this
came from here, but at the same time it
says, "Yeah, three strikes, you are
out." Well, this is not exactly what we
want. It is either we are happy we are
at the same page or you are out, not
both of them. And that's because we have
this print completely outside the while
loop. So, after we broke the loop, the
next instruction in Python going to be
the print. So, this going to be executed
whatever happened in our while loop. But
my friends, I would like this to be
executed only if we didn't break. Now,
think about it. What we have used in the
for loop in order to print something
didn't break? Well, we have to go and
use the else statements. And yes, we can
use else together with the while, not
only for the for loop. So, let's go and
add that. We're going to say else double
point, and then put this print inside
it. So, that means if the loop ended
normally without a break, this message
going to be printed, but if Python
executed the break, then Python will not
execute the else. So, either we exit
normally and execute the else, otherwise
we exit with emergency using the break.
So, now let's try this out. The first
one going to be no, then the second one
we're going to say yes. So, now as you
can see we are getting now only one
message, glad we are on the same page
and this came from the break. That means
we fulfilled this condition and Python
printed the message, executed the break
and with that we exit immediately from
the loop without executing the else
statements. And we can do the last test
where we have never given a yes. As you
can see now we are getting the three
strikes you are out and this came from
the else statements. So, as you can see
we can use the other control statements
like the break, pass, continue, the else
statements in order to build our logic
and control exactly how our loop can
behave. All right my friends, so now by
looking back to our road map with that
we have learned how to loop in Python
and with that we have closed actually
this category on how to control the
execution of your code using those three
chapters. Now moving on to the next
chapter, we have the data structures.
This going to be the biggest and the
most important chapter in the whole
course. Now the thing is previously you
have learned how to work with data, but
with only using one single value. But
the thing is actually in companies, in
real projects, data come in collections,
in groups. We call them data structures.
So, we have advanced types like the
list, tuple, set, dictionaries. So, that
means this time you're going to learn
how to work with these advanced data
types. We're going to learn all the
tools that we're going to need in order
to work with these advanced data types.
And again, this is really important for
job interviews and as well for real
projects. So, let's deep dive into this
chapter. I want you to be full focused
because this going to be amazing. So,
what is data structure? And of course,
if you want in the future more content
like this for free, then support the
channel by subscribing, liking, and
commenting. This is going to really help
pushing on that channel to reach nice
people like you. And as well, it's going
to push on me to make more content for
you. If you would like to support more,
then you can go to the Data Academy and
as well, you can purchase my courses
there. In the Data Academy, it's going
to be easier to follow the structure
because it is designed for courses. And
YouTube is actually not for that. So,
you going to follow a clean structure
and you can follow the progress and at
the end you're going to get the
certificate of completion. And as well,
I have there quizzes and tasks to
challenge your new skills. So now, let's
go back to the course.
So, what is a data structure? It is a
way of organizing, managing, storing
your data in Python so that you can use
it efficiently. That means you can
access it, read it, and modify it very
easily. And in Python, we have four
built-in data structures like the list,
tuple, set, and dictionary. And now of
course, the big question is, why do we
need it? Why do we need even to organize
our data? What this means? Now, so far
we have been playing with simple data
types in Python like numbers, strings,
boolean. They are great stuff of course,
but the thing is, they can hold only one
single value. So, that's why we call
those stuff like the primitive data
types. But in real world, things get
more complicated where you don't have
only one value, you have multiple
values. And for that, we need more
modern data types like the one that we
can use in the data structure. If you
just work with the primitive data types,
things going to get messy and chaotic.
So, let's have a quick example. Now,
usually we have one variable like the
cost and inside it we store a value like
for example, 10. So, this is totally
fine because we have only one single
value, but in reality, you're going to
end up having multiple costs. So, you
have another value like 15, and then you
go and store it in another variable
called cost two, and then another one
20, 25, 30. So, you have already five
variables for five values. And now, if
you want to say, "You know what? I would
like to go and find the total cost."
Then, you have to go and summarize all
those costs. So, that means if we're
going to get another cost, that means we
have to create variable, and we're going
to go and extend our formula. And
imagine now you have like 100 of values,
then you're going to end up having a
really big script. So, this is really
bad way on how to handle the data, and
this can turn immediately to chaos. So,
now instead of having five variables,
we're going to go and create a structure
called list. So, we're going to have one
variable called costs, and then in one
container, in one line, we're going to
put all the values of the costs, and
then separated using a comma. So, that
means we have one container for all the
costs. And now, if you want to calculate
the total cost, it's going to be very
simple. All what you have to do is to
use a function called sum, and then pass
to it our structure. So, the variable
name costs. If you do that, you're going
to get the exact same results as the
previous one. And now, the best part, if
tomorrow you got a new costs, you don't
have to go and create anything else. So,
no new variable, no changing of the
formula. All what you have to do is to
go and drop those values inside the
list. So, now just look at it, you
understand exactly why we need data
structure. Our data is nicely organized,
our code is shorter, and it is very easy
to operate. So, the rule is very simple.
If you have multiple values for the same
topic, like the costs, then you have to
use a container, a data structure in
order to handle those values. And again,
in Python, there is like not only one
way on how to store multiple values. We
have four different built-in data
structures to do that. The most famous
one is a list. It is a collection of
items, like for example, a shopping
list. Another type we have the tuple. It
is very similar to the list, but it is
locked, so you cannot change any items
inside it. A third one called sets. It
is a collection of items as well, but
the items must be unique, so there will
be no duplicates inside them. And the
last one, we have the dictionaries,
where we have the key-value pairs. And
this one is very important, especially
if you are a data engineer, data
analyst, or data scientist. It is
fundamental for you. So, as you can see,
each type has its own features. Now, you
might say, "Wait a second. What are all
those weird symbols?" Like we have a lot
of different types of brackets, right?
Well, we use them in order to define and
tell Python which type of data structure
we want. So, if you want a list, you use
the square brackets. For the tuple,
you're going to use the parentheses. And
if you want a set or dictionary, you're
going to use the curly brackets. So, the
brackets going to tell Python which type
you want to deal with. So, now let's say
that we have a data structure, for
example, list. And the question is, what
we can do with it? Well, you can do a
lot of things. Like, for example, you
can access specific value and read it.
Or you can do some checks. You are
searching for bad data. And another
thing, you can go and change it. And
many other transformations,
manipulations, and advanced operators
that we could use on top of our data.
And now the question is, what are the
tools that we can use in order to do all
those stuff? So, now remember, in Python
we have standard library. And inside it
we have multiple modules, and the one
that we are working all the time is the
built-in. And if you go inside it, you
will find functions. We call them the
built-in functions, like the print,
type, length, summarize, max, min, and
many other functions that really gives
you a lot of tools to manipulate the
data structure. And at the same time, we
have something called classes. And for
each type, we have a dedicated class.
Like we have class for list, class for
tuple, and for set, and dictionary. And
now, each class has its own methods.
It's as well something like the
function. It is a tool in order to do
something. But again, those methods are
allowed only for specific type. And once
you create a data structure like, for
example, a tuple, then Python going to
go and assign it for the correct class.
And then, you are allowed only to use
those methods in this class. Like, for
example, the count, the index. But now,
if you go and use an append or insert,
then you will get an error because this
is not part of your class. So, this is
really interesting to understand. In
case you get an error, you will know why
you are getting it. Maybe because you
are using something not allowed. So,
with that, we have enough tools in order
to manipulate the data inside our data
structure. So, now I would like you to
understand one big difference between
functions and methods. Not only we have
a difference in the syntax, where we
start with the function name, and then
we pass to it like the variable. But
with the methods, we start with the
variable, then dots, then method name.
But the big difference is what can
happen if you use it. Usually, the
function is very simple. You give it an
input, and then something can happen,
and in the output, you will get
something out. Like, for example, the
function length going to give you at the
end how many items do you have inside
your list. And now, in the methods, they
as well accept an input. But we have
many methods that going to go and
directly manipulate the input value. So,
the original value going to be changed
without returning anything in the
output. So, you will get none in the
output. So, by looking to this, the
functions will not manipulate the
original value the input. It will just
return a new value. But the methods,
they are more risky, where they going to
change directly the [music] original
value.
Quickly, some coffee.
All right. We're going to start with the
first type of data structure in Python.
We have the list. So, what is a list? A
list is just an ordered collection of
items that is very flexible where you
can do anything with it. Like you can
add and change stuff. You can order it.
It can maintain a lot of duplicates. So,
there are like no rules and you have a
lot of freedom to do whatever you want.
And that's why the list are widely used
in Python and usually the first thing
that you're going to learn. So, now
we're going to deep dive into all the
operations and things that you can do
with the list. First, we're going to
start with the basics like how to create
our data, how to create the list. And
then after that, we're going to learn
how to read and access our data and
maybe how to unpack our data in
different variables. Then the next step
is that we have to go and learn how to
explore and analyze the content of our
data in order to have some basic
understanding about the contents. And
naturally after that, you find some
issues. And as well, actually your data
evolves over the time. So, you have to
learn how to change the original data by
adding new items, removing some bad data
or old data. Or maybe you say, "I'm
going to give it another chance by
correcting, fixing, updating the data."
And after that, we're going to learn how
to be more organized and not chaotic by
learning how to organize, reorder, and
sort the data inside the list. And after
that, we're going to learn how to be
professional where we don't go directly
and change the content of the raw
original data. But instead, we're going
to go and make an extra copy so that we
don't lose the raw data. But we have to
learn how to do it correctly so that you
don't get nasty surprises. And after
that, you will get the reality check
where you understand that actually not
everything always in one simple list.
But in real projects, your data going to
be spreaded in different lists. And your
job is to go and maybe combine them back
to one big list. And with that, we will
be covering all the basics and then
we're going to go to advanced topics
where we're going to learn the different
methods on how to iterate through your
data and items inside your list. And
then we're going to learn how to do data
transformation, how to do data filtering
because you don't want to deal with all
the items of your data. And then we're
going to go to the last advanced
technique. This is going to be the most
powerful and the coolest feature in
Python where you combine the three power
of looping through the data, filtering
the data, and transforming it.
Everything in one simple line. So, this
is the plan. This is our road map. We're
going to go and deep dive into each one
of them. And we will start with the
first one, how to create a new list. So,
let's dive in. So,
now of course always the first question
is how to create things. How to create a
collection of data using list? Because
without it, we cannot do anything,
right? So, let's learn how we can do
that. So, now I'm going to show you
step-by-step how to create a list. And
we're going to start with the easiest
one. We're going to create an empty
list. So, in order to create one, we're
going to go and use the square brackets.
And if you don't enter anything in
between them, then actually you are
creating an empty list. Now, in order to
see the output, as usual, we're going to
use the print. And then we print the
variable empty. So, let's see what we're
going to have. Look at the output. We
just have again the square brackets and
nothing inside it. So, this we call an
empty list. Now, of course, we could
check as well the data type of our
variable in order to understand that we
created actually a list, not something
else. And we're going to use the
built-in function type. And then we're
going to pass for it our variable. So,
let's try this out. Now, look to the
output. We are getting the class list.
So, that you are sure I just created a
list. Now, behind the scenes, what can
happen is that Python going to create an
object in the memory, and our variable
going to be pointing to these objects.
And the type of this object going to be
a list, but still we don't have anything
inside it. So, it is still an empty.
Now, of course, we don't want to leave
it empty. We want to have our data
inside it. So, there are multiple ways
on how to put data inside a list. The
simplest one is to enter the data
manually. Let me show you what I mean.
So, let's go and create a list of
letters. So, I'm going to call the
variables letters, and then I'm going to
make a new list, and in between I will
start adding values like, for example,
the letter A, then B, and a third one,
C. So, as you can see, I'm entering the
values manually inside the list, and we
can try and print
this to the output, and as well check
the
data type. So, let's go and execute it.
Now, as you can see in the output, we
are getting a list full of data, and as
well, since we are using the square
brackets, it is the class list. Now, by
looking back to this, behind the scenes,
Python going to go and create an object
in the memory for each value. And the
type of the object going to be, of
course, a string. So, we going to have
one for A, another one for B, and third
one for C. Now, by looking to this, we
have now two types of objects, right? We
have the values, the string values, and
we have the object list. Now, by looking
to this, you can see Python is not
creating the string objects directly
inside the list. It is really outside.
So, actually, what is missing now is the
connection between the list and the
string objects. That's why Python going
to create internally in the list
something called array, and inside it,
it going to store like an address. So,
that means those addresses going to be
used in order to point or to reference
to the string objects. Now, and of
course, the address values are not that
really important. So, now, by looking to
this, the list objects is actually just
a box of pointers. It does not hold the
real informations, and the pointers
going to be pointing to another objects,
like for example, the string objects,
where inside it the real values are
stored. And this is exactly how Python
deals with the lists. And of course, we
could make a list of numbers, like for
example, numbers, and we could have 1 2
and 3. So,
let's print it in the output as well,
and you can see we have now a nice list
of numbers. And now, by looking back to
this, again we're going to have a list
with pointers, and those pointers going
to point now to a new objects. It's
going to be the integer objects, where
they store the numbers 1 2 3. So, it is
the same concept. Now, of course, it is
very important to understand that you
can go and mix stuff. So, inside the
same list you could store different data
types. So, we could go and make a mixed
list, and we could store stuff like, for
example, 1 a a Boolean true, and as well
we could use the none. So, we could have
a nice mix of different data types, and
if you go and of course print it or
check as well the data type. So, let's
go and execute. You could see I'm still
using a list, but with different data
types. And it going to look like this.
It's going to be again the same thing.
You going to have an object list with
different pointers, and this time they
are pointing to different types of
objects. It going to point to an object
integer, an object string, a Boolean,
and a none type. So, Python is very
flexible, and you could have a mix of
different data types in the same list.
Okay, so now there is another way to
create a list in Python by using the
built-in function list. So, how this
going to work? Let's say that we have a
string value data. So, the data type
here is a string. And now, if you go and
use the list function, what going to
happen? Python going to take each
character of your string and put it in a
separate item in complete new list. So,
that they're going to be one item, the A
going to be another, and so on for each
letter of your string. So, now by
looking to this, you can see we can
reuse the data that we have in different
shape and convert it to a data
structure, a list. So, this is another
way on how to create a brand new list
from already existing data. Okay, so now
let's try this out. So, you're going to
go and create an empty list by using the
function list. So, if you do that and
print the empty, so let's go and execute
it. You can see in the output we are
getting an empty list. So, as you can
see, using this function we can create a
list. Now, of course, if you want to put
items inside it, you have to use
something inside the function. So, let's
go and create another variable, and
currently it is holding the value
Python. So, it is a string value. But
now, I would like to have all those
values as a list. So, let's go and print
this out.
letters and execute. So, as you can see,
it is very simple string value. But now,
the thing is I would like to have a
list, so I don't want to have it as a
string value. It is very simple if you
go and say list, and then put the string
value inside it, like this. Now, if you
go and execute it, now look at this.
Python did create a list and converted
each letter of our string as an item of
this list. So, that I have just created
a list out of another value, another
data type. And of course, for the list
function we can pass any data type that
actually a sequence. So, for example,
let's go and create something called
numbers, and then a list. Now, remember
with the for loop, we could use a
function to generate numbers, like for
example, the range. Now, if you go and
say, "Okay, go and generate five
numbers." So, with that it's going to be
like a sequence of numbers from zero to
four, and then you say, "Okay, after you
generated, go convert it to a list." So,
put it in a list. With that, you will
have a list of numbers. So, let's try
this out and say numbers.
And let's go and execute it. Look at
this. We have now a list of numbers. So,
0 1 2 3 4. Those items came actually
from that generator range. So, as you
can see, all what you need is actually a
sequence. So, this is another way on how
to create a list by converting the data
from one data type to a list.
All right. So far, [music] everything is
easy, right? Now, we're going to go to
something very interesting. So far, all
what we have is actually a very simple
list with a straight line of items. This
is actually one row of data, or we can
call it one dimension. But now,
sometimes, I don't want to have only one
row. I would like to have multiple rows.
It looks like something like a table.
And we can do that using something
called nested list. It is very simple.
If you put a list inside another list,
if you do that, then you will have
multiple rows, and you will have the
shape of 2D. Now, how Python going to
store this? We still have our variable
that is pointing to an object called
list. And inside this object, we can
have as well some pointers. But this
time, instead of pointing directly to
the values, they will point to another
object list. So, in this example, our
list going to be pointing to another two
object lists. And of course, since they
are an object list, they as well going
to be pointing to something else. And in
this example, they will be pointing to
three different string values. So, by
looking to this, my friends, the object
list could point to the real data, but
as well, they could point to another
list. So, it is very simple. It is a
list inside another list. I know that
many of you are asking how I do those
animated sketches, right?
So, the thing is, I don't use any AI
generated tools. I draw them myself
using my iPad Pro. So, I'm using here an
app called Procreate. Everything that I
draw is actually going to get recorded
and at the end the whole history going
to be like animated video.
And the last step in the process, I use
DaVinci Resolve in order to make cuts
and zoom in zoom out, something like
that. So, this is a very manual process
and takes a lot of time to do. That's
why my content takes [music] time to be
built. If you enjoyed it, you can like
share it with others and support this
kind of tutorials. Now, let's go back to
the course. So, now let's go and create
a nested list or a matrix. It is very
simple. We going to start with the first
list. And now inside it, we will not
directly add the values. We will go and
create another list. So, now you can see
square brackets inside another square
brackets and only inside the second one,
I will be creating our values. So, for
example, A, B, and C. So, this is the
first list, the first row. And then I'm
going to go and separate it with a comma
and then create the second list. So, now
we're going to go and add the other
values like D, E, and F. Okay, so now
let's go and print it and check how it's
going to look like in the output and
check as well the other type. Let's go
and execute it. Now, as you can see the
class going to still a list and with
that I'm getting my matrix. Now, in
order to make it easier to read and to
write, usually each time you are
starting a new list, just make it in a
new line. It is just now easier to
understand and read. And of course, it
can still works. Python going to print
it but together in the same line. So,
this is very simple. This is how you can
create a matrix, 2D list or a nested
list. And as usual, you could make mixed
stuff. So, let me show you another
example. So, I'm going to call it mixed
matrix. So, now I could start for
example with string values like A and B
and then start a new matrix where
actually there are numbers. So, one,
two, and three. Python is totally
flexible. You don't have to commit
actually with the same number of items.
So, on the first list, we have two
items. In the second one, we have three
items. And maybe a third list, where we
have boolean value like, for example,
true. So, if you go and print it,
matrix. So, we are not getting any
errors. As you can see, Python is
totally flexible, but it is your job to
make sure this makes sense.
>> So, now let's do a quick recap. We have
different ways on how to create a list.
The first one, we could create an empty
list if you use the square brackets and
nothing inside it. Or you can use the
function list without specifying
anything inside it. This is really nice
in order to create it and plan later to
add the items. Another way is by
manually adding the items. You can use
it if you know already what are the
items in the list. And another way you
could build a matrix if you put
different list inside a list. So, it's
like we are nesting. And it is great in
order to build a data structure like
tables, where you have rows and columns.
So, if you have the data already, but in
different data type or an object, you
can go and just simply convert it to a
list. So, you will get the same data,
but in different objects. So, with that,
you have learned everything on how to
create a list from the scratch. And now
you can go and apply a lot of methods
and things on the list.
Okay, so now let's say that you have
created a list. Of course, the next
question is how to use it, how to read
information from it, and how to access
specific value in my list. So, now we're
going to talk about a very important two
concepts, the indexing and the slicing.
So, let's go. Okay, so let's start step
by step. I'm going to go and create
again a list. And this time we're going
to go and include four letters, A, B,
C, and D. Now, we start with the first
step where I say, "You know what? I
would like to access and read the whole
thing, the whole list." So, I need all
the items. We have done this already, so
all you have to do is to use the print
function and just specify the variable
name without anything. So, if you do
that and execute, actually you are
reading and accessing all the items
inside the list. But, of course, this is
boring. What is more interesting than
that to go and access only one item,
something very specific. So, we are
saying, "I don't need the whole thing, I
just need one item." And for that, we
use something called indexing. What is
indexing and why we need it? Now, look
at our list. So, now if you say I want
to access something specific, like for
example, the first letter or the last
letter, or maybe to say the third
letter. So, that means I'm interested
with the position number of each item.
So, it's going to start from the left to
the right. The first one has the slot
zero. And here be careful, we are not
starting from one. So, A has the
position number zero, index zero. B has
one, C two, and D three. Now, if you
say, "I would like to get the first
item," all what you have to tell Python
is the index number. And for that, we
use as well again the brackets together
with the variable name. So, now if you
specify a zero between the square
brackets, Python understands, "Aha, we
need the item inside the slot zero." So,
with that you are accessing exactly one
single value and the one that you need.
And if you say, "You know what? I would
like to get the last item," then you
specify the index three and you will get
D. And if you say, "I need the second
item," here be careful if you are saying
second, that doesn't mean the index two.
The second item here has the index
number one since we are starting from
zero. And for that, you will get a B.
Now, what is cool in Python you we can
go backwards if you use the negative
numbers. So, now if you are counting
from the right side going to the left
side, the first item going to have the
position number minus one. So, it
doesn't start from zero, then minus two,
minus three, and four. This is really
nice if you have a long list and you are
interested only on the last items. So,
here you can say quickly, give me the
last item by specifying the index minus
one. And with that, you will get the D.
So, this means if you are using in the
index the position number three or minus
one, at the end you will get the same
results. So, this is really nice. You
get exactly what you need, but again,
only one single item. Okay, so let's
practice. Again, I don't want the whole
thing. I just want one item. And let's
say that I would like to get the first
item. All what you have to do is to say,
for example, print, then the variable
name, and now side by side you add the
square brackets, and now you have to
define the index. So, again, we need the
first item. The first item on the left
side is going to be zero. So, something
like that. Let's go and execute. Now, as
you can see in the output, I'm getting
the item A. But let's say that I would
like to get the last item. So, we can go
and say print, again the variable and
the brackets. Now, of course, you can
start counting 0 1 2 3, but this is
annoying. Since you are saying I would
like the last item, then it's way better
to use the negative numbers, and it's
going to be really easy. The last item
going to be always minus one. So, let's
execute. You can see I'm getting D. Now,
let's say I would like to go and get the
C. So, print again
our variable name. Now, here again, you
could go and say 0 1 2, but I would like
to get it with the negative number since
it's closer to the end. Then I'm going
to say minus one, minus two, and I will
get my C. Let's try this out. And with
that, I'm getting C. So, this is exactly
how you can get and access exactly one
single value using the index.
>> [music]
>> Okay, so now let's take things to the
next level where we talk about how to
access and read a matrix. So, let's say
that we have three lists inside one big
list. Of course, here things are a
little bit more complicated, but I
always think about it like going to the
cinema and finding your seats. So, as
you know, in your card you're going to
have like two very important numbers,
the row number and the seat number. So,
how you find your seat? First, you have
to find your row number and once you
find your row, then you check the second
number, your seat. This is exactly how
you navigate a matrix in Python. So, for
the first row we have the row number
zero, then the second one going to be
one and the third going to be two. So,
this is your first number. The second
number in order to find the seat, you
need the numbers for the columns. And as
well here, it's like the simple list for
each item we have a number. So, 0 1 2.
So, now once we have the numbers, we can
access anything that you want in the
matrix. And here you have to be careful
what you are specifying. So, if you
don't specify anything for Python and
you say matrix, so you are just giving
the variable name, so that you are
targeting the whole list with all rows
and all items. But now, if you want to
target for example a complete row, so I
don't want the whole thing, I just want
one row, but I want all the values of
this row. In order to do that, we have
to specify for Python the row number and
we use the variable name together with
the square brackets and you give the row
number, for example here one. So, you
are now at the second level of your
matrix. And now we go to the last level
where you say, "You know what? I need
specific value or values from one row."
So, for example, you say, "I just want
the E from the second row." Again, it is
exactly like you are finding the seat in
the cinema. You have to specify the
second value for Python. So, not only
the row number, but as well the index
number of the value. So, in this
example, we are targeting the index one
in the second row. And now you are at
the lowest level in our matrix. So
again, if you just give the variable
name, you are accessing the whole list.
If you give only one number, then you
are accessing one row, a whole row. But
if you give a second number, then you
are accessing a specific value in
specific row. This is very important to
understand in order to target exactly
which information you want to work with.
Okay, so let's try this out with the
matrix. Again, we have our nice matrix
with three rows and each row has three
items. So we have three lists inside one
big list. Now let's go and practice by
reading and selecting. The first thing I
would like to go and select everything.
So the whole matrix. It's going to be
very simple. You're going to say print
and you just need the variable name. So
if you do that, look at the output. You
are retrieving everything from our
matrix. So all rows, all items. Now
let's say that I don't need the whole
thing. I just need the last row. So the
last list that you have inside the
matrix. All what you have to do is to
say, "Okay, we're going to have the
matrix, but this time we're going to be
selecting specific row. So the last row
going to be the row number two. So 0 1
2. And in order to select it, we have to
use the square brackets and then say
two. I just want to comment this out and
then let's go and execute. Now look at
this. We have the last row in the
output. And as you can see, I'm not
specifying which item in the list. I'm
just saying give me all the items of the
last row. And now since we are seeing
the last row, actually don't have to go
and count stuff. Just go and use the
minus one. With that, you will get
always the last row of any matrix. So
look at this. We are getting the same
results. So it doesn't matter whether we
have hundred of rows. If you say minus
one, you will get the last one. Now
let's say that I don't need the whole
row. I just need one thing. Like for
example, I would like to get the I. So
the last item from the last row. So we
are going deeper. Now we're going to
say, "Okay, print matrix." So, now the
first thing is that we have to specify
which row we are talking about. Well, we
said that the last item in the last row.
So, that means it's going to be the
minus one for the last row. Now, Python
is actually focusing on this one here.
So, now forget about the other rows,
just focus on one simple array. We need
to tell Python where you can find the
item. So, 0 1 2. So, this is the index
number and I'm going to go and use
another square brackets in order to
select the item. So, it's going to be
two. Now, if you go and execute it, look
at the output. We are getting the I. And
again, the same thing, since it is the
last item actually, all what you have to
do is to go and say minus one. And if I
run this again, I will get the same
result. And again here, if you want the
last item from the last row, just go and
use minus one minus one and you will get
that item, whatever your matrix looks
like. And now, I'm going to ask you how
to get the first item of the first row
without counting. Just think about it.
Well, we're going to say matrix and just
blindly I'm going to go with zero and
zero. I will not count anything. If you
go and execute it, you will get the A.
This is going to be the first item of
the first row and you can use this as
well in any matrix. So, that you have
the first item, the last item. Now,
let's go and try to get the one in the
middle. So, the E. We're going to say
again, matrix. Now, in which row we can
find the E? Well, 0 1. That means in the
row number one. And now, inside the row
number one, where we find the E? So, 0
1. As well, the same thing. So, it's
going to be one as well. So, let's go
and execute it. So, as you can see, we
are getting now the E. This is not a
rule. You cannot say, "Okay, each time
I'm going to use the 1 1, I will get the
item in the middle of the matrix."
Because this really depends on the size
of the matrix. Okay. So, this is how the
indexing works with the matrix. It is
not that hard, right?
All right. So, so far we have learned
how to retrieve everything or retrieve
one single item. But, how about to
retrieve multiple items? For example, in
my list I would like to get access to
only two characters, the B and C. So,
for this we cannot use the index.
Instead, we going to use something
called slicing. So now, let's look at
this and see how this works. We don't
need the whole list. We would like to
slice it to cut it. And for that, you
have to like two boundaries, the start
and the end. So, you have to tell Python
actually two things. And for the syntax,
we're going to still using the square
brackets. Now, the first thing that we
have to specify is the starting index.
In this example, it's going to be one.
And the second thing you need the stop
index. So, for that first you have to
use double points and then you specify
the index. Here in Python, the stop
index is not inclusive. So, that means
you don't specify here two, you have to
specify three. So, we stop at three and
three is not included. If you do that,
you will retrieve now two items, the B
and C. Now, another example, let's say
that I would like to get the first three
characters. So again, what is the
starting index? It is zero. And the end
index going to stay as three. If you do
that, you will get ABC. Now, there is
something really cool in Python. The
starting index, the zero, it is actually
a default. So, that means if you are
start slicing from the first item in the
list, you don't actually have to specify
it in the syntax. So, you can skip it
and you start immediately with the
double points. And you will get, of
course, the same results. By the way,
this is the same thing for the last
item. So, let's say I would like to
extract C and D. So, the start position
going to be two, but the stop position
going to be four. You cannot have three
because the stop is exclusive. And of
course, you will get the result, but
this is not really nice. Instead, you're
going to say two double points and then
empty, nothing. So, you say I want to
start slicing from the index two and
then I want to get everything after it.
And now think about it, if I just
specify the double points without
starting position and end position, what
going to happen? Well, it going to work.
You will not get any error. If you do
that, you will get the whole list. So,
you say I want everything from the start
until the end. And if you want that,
actually don't use any brackets or
double points. Just use the variable
name. Okay, so let's try this out. I
would like to get the first two
characters.
So, we going to print
our variable name and then our square
brackets. Now, since I want the first
two characters, that means I don't have
to go and specify the first character.
And since the first two characters 0 1
2, I stop at two. So, now let's try this
out. As you can see, I'm getting now A
and B. Now, let's go and get the last
two characters.
So, print lst. Now, I have to specify
the starting position. It's going to be
0 1 2, so we start from two, double
points. So, now since I want everything
after this position, I'm going to leave
it empty. And if you go and execute it,
you will get CD. And now let's try this
fun one. And I say we are slicing, but
actually without defining anything. I
execute it, you will get the whole list
exactly like the first print. So,
slicing is simple, right? And of course,
my friends, we can slice our matrix. So,
let's say that I would like to get only
the first two list, the first two rows.
So, we can do it like this. We say print
and then matrix. So, now it's time to
slice. We start with the first row, that
means with a zero, and then double
points, and we stop at the row number
two. Again, the stop is exclusive. So,
we going to say two. But since we are
starting from the beginning, we don't
have to mention the zero. So, if you go
and execute it, you will get in the
output the first two lists. As you can
see, it is very simple. Now, let's say
that I would like to get the opposite
the last two lists. So, we're going to
say print matrix and this specify the
start. So, the start going to be the row
number one and then double points. And
now, since everything else in the list,
we don't have to specify any ends
because I want the rest. Let me just
remove this one over here and then
re-execute. Look at this. We are getting
the last two lists from my matrix. Now,
you might say, "Okay, nice. We are
slicing the rows. But how about to slice
actually inside one specific row?" For
example, I would like to get the G and H
from the row number two. So, how we can
do that? Now, we are moving to another
level, right? So, we're going to say
matrix. So, now we don't want to target
the whole matrix. We want to target one
specific list. So, we are focusing
actually on the row number two. So, we
have to tell Python about it. Now, focus
and target the row number two and after
that, you forget everything else. So,
forget the first two lists. Now, we are
at the normal list. How to get the first
two items from a list? We do it like
this. We start another brackets and
since we start from the beginning, we
don't have to specify the zero. We start
immediately with the double points. And
now, I need the G and H. That means I
stop at two. So, let's try this out and
see what can happen. Exactly, we are
getting now the G and H. So, always
think about this cinema example. First,
we have to specify which row we want to
slice from and then after that, we tell
Python what to do inside this row. Once
you understand it, you can do anything
with the 2D lists. Okay, friends. So,
with that, we have learned everything on
how to read and access anything in a
list. So, if you want to go and access
only one single item, we use the
indexing. But if you want to go and
slice multiple items from your list, we
can go and use the slicing. And of
course, if you want to get items from
the start of the list, then go and use
the positive numbers. But if you want to
get data and items at the end of the
list, you can go and use the negative
numbers. And if you are working with
matrix, always you have to think about
first we have to specify the row and
then go and get the exact value that I'm
searching for. So, with that you have
learned how to create a list, how to
read and access a list. And to be
honest, this is basically 80% of the
things that we do with the data
structure in real projects.
All right, friends. Now we're going to
talk about something really interesting
on how to deal with the data structure.
We have the concept of unpacking. So far
what you have done is that we have
created a list where we have packed
multiple items together in one
container, in one box. So, it's like you
are putting your stuff in a traveling
bag. So, we are packing. And of course,
we can do now the opposite where we
start unpacking stuff. So, we go and
open the bag and start taking the items
out of it and maybe put it somewhere
else. This is exactly what we can do in
Python with our list. As you create your
list, you are packing your items inside
a container. And we can use unpacking in
order to take the items out of the list
and put it in different variables. This
is exactly what we mean with the
unpacking. And now of course, the big
question is why do we need to unpack the
items of a list? So, what is exactly the
use case? Like for example, we have a
list of personal informations. Like you
have the name, the age, the role, and
the country. As you can see, each piece
of item inside the list has like
different meaning. And for each of those
informations, we could use different
operations. Like with the name, I can go
and calculate the length of the names.
And with the age, I can go and find the
average or maybe compare it with another
number. With the role and the city, I
could use them for example to build a
category. So, we could use it in order
to do some aggregations or maybe filter
based on a category. So now, in order to
work with those informations, it makes
sense to put them first in different
variables and then apply the operations.
And this is exactly why we need
unpacking. We're going to put those
informations in different variables so
that it going to be later easier to do
the different operations. So this is
exactly why we need unpacking. Okay, so
now in order to understand it, let's
have the following example. So we have a
list of personal informations, like for
example, the first name. Let's take
Maria. And then we have her age, it's
going to be 29. Then maybe her role, she
is a data engineer and maybe as well a
country, like maybe Spain. Now maybe I
would like to go and grab each of those
informations individually and put it in
separate variables. So for example, I
would like to have like for the name, a
separate variable. And in order to do
that, we could use of course the index.
So we're going to say it's going to be
the index zero. And then we're going to
go and grab the age. It's going to be
the index number one. Then the role,
the next one. The last one going to be
the country equal to person then three.
Now of course it's going to be really
annoying if you have like 10
informations about the person. That
means you have to go and write 10 lines
of codes. Well, for this kind of
scenario where you are extracting from a
list, we have better solution where
we're going to have smarter and cleaner
solution by using the unpacking. Now how
we're going to do it? Now you remember
as we built our list, we just made like
a list of values after each others. And
we separated them using the comma. Now
we're going to do the same thing, but
this time we're going to make a list of
variable names. So we're going to do it
like this. We're going to have a name,
comma, then age, comma, role, comma, and
country. And of course we don't use the
square brackets. And after that, we're
going to say equal and then we're going
to assign the values from our list. So
now look at this again. We have a list
of variable names, and here it is very
important the order of the variable
names must be matching your list. So,
since here we have a name, we're going
to start with the name. And if you
switch that, you will get an issue. So,
that means those four variables are
getting their value from the list
person. So, of course, we can go and
test it. For example, let's go and print
the name. So, if you go and execute it,
you will get Maria. And if you go and
test, for example, the role and execute,
you will get data engineering. And now,
if you compare the unpacking with the
old methods on how to assign values
using the index, you can see everything
in one line, and it is clean, easy to
read, and you don't have to deal with
all those indexes, where exactly is the
age and the name. And as well, it is
very easy to extend. Like, for example,
if you get like fifth value, like the
city, all what you have to do is to just
extend the list of variables, like to
add the city like this. So, this is very
powerful.
Now, this is only [music] the basics.
With the unpacking, we have a lot of
cool things. Like, for example, we have
our list, and again, we have our four
values. Now, what could happen is that
you might say, "You know what? I'm only
interested with the first item and the
last item." So, only with the name and
the country, and everything in between
is actually something that I'm not
interested about. So, I really don't
care about the data in the middle. So,
now, I don't want to go and create a
variable for each item. I just want to
have variables for the first and the
last. So, now, instead of having a lot
of variables, we could have only three.
So, now, we could put the first item in
one variable and the last item in
another variable. And now, everything in
between, you can put it in one variable.
And you can do that with the magic of
the operator asterisk. With that, Python
going to understand, "Aha, the first
item going to be for the name, the last
item going to be for the country, and
everything in between Python going to go
and put it in details. So, with the star
you are telling Python go and collect
the leftovers and go put it in a new
list. Okay, so now again, let's try this
out. I am interested with the first
item, so I'm going to leave the name. I
am interested with the last item, so I
need the country, but everything in
between is actually don't matter. So,
I'm going to go and get rid of those two
variables, and then I'm going to say
asterisk and my new variable going to be
details. So now, let's try out. I want
to print the name, then of course we
want the details
without the star. You just use it as you
are unpacking. And the last one going to
be the country. So, let's go and
execute. Look at this. The first
variable is Maria, the second one going
to be the middle one where we collected
all unnecessary stuff, and the last one
Spain for the country. So, it is amazing
now if I go and add any value in the
middle, like for example the city, it
going to be considered as unnecessary
information. And if I go and execute it,
it will go and join the middle variable,
the details, together with the other
values. It is clearly I'm interested
only with the first and the last. And of
course, if I go and add an item at the
start and then execute it, now as you
can see the ID is now the first item,
and Maria did join the middle list. So,
it is again, I'm not interested about
this information, and Python packed it
in the middle. Now, what else we can do
with that? If you say, "You know what,
I'm interested only with the first item
and everything else is actually not
interesting for me, even the last item."
So, what we can do, we can say, "Okay,
for the first item we're going to stay
with one variable, but everything else,
the rest, will be included in the
asterisk, so the details, and we will
not be specifying a variable for the
last item." So now with this we have
only two variables, one without the
asterisk in order to get the first item,
and the rest going to be with the
asterisk. So, let's try this out. I'm
going to go and get rid of the ID. Now,
we're going to say, "Okay, the country
is actually details. I don't want to
have like dedicated variable for it.
What is very important for me is only
the first item, and the rest is actually
not interesting. So, everything else
going to be in the details. And now, if
you go and print it, you can see the
name is holding only one value, Maria,
and the details is now holding the rest,
everything, even the last item. So, this
is really nice if you want to just focus
on one information and put the rest in
another list. And of course, exactly we
can do the opposite where we say, "You
know what? The last item is the most
important one, and everything else, the
rest, is actually not interesting, even
the first item." So, now I think it is
pretty easy, right? What we're going to
do, we're going to go and remove the
first item. So, with the star, asterisk,
and then after the details, we're going
to say the country information is very
important. So, now what we're going to
do, we're going to say, "Print
country." And let's go and try this out.
Now, look at this. The first four items
is actually in one list, and only the
last item, Spain, is actually living
outside of this list. So, as you can
see, it is really simple. Always the
order of the variables is very
important. And of course, you can try
things like this. You say, "You know
what? Let's get the city and the
country, and everything else in
details." Well, if you go and of course
print it
and execute, so with that I'm putting
the city in one item, the country in one
item, and the rest going to be in a
list. So, with that you decide exactly
which items going to be in separate
variable, and what are the items going
to be in the list. So, with that you can
extract exactly what you need. And be
careful, you are allowed only to use one
asterisk. So, here we used it with the
details, but now if you go and put it as
well for the country, this will make no
sense at all. So, you will get an error.
We are allowed to use only one asterisk
one time.
Now, I'm going to show you quickly the
rules of using unpacking in Python. So,
now the first one is that the number of
variables must be matching. So, now
let's say that we have a list of
variables, first, second, third, and
maybe last and from numbers. Now, the
first rule is that the number of
variables must be matching exactly the
number of values if you are not using
the asterisk. So, now if I go and
execute it, I will not get any error.
But now, if you go and remove one of
them with that you have three variables
and execute, you will get an error
because you have too few variables to
fit your list. Python going to say,
"Okay, I don't know where to put
actually the four. You gave me only
three variables. I need four." And the
same thing if you have actually too
many. So, third, fourth. Now, if you go
and execute it, I'm going to get as well
an error because here I have too many
variables for too few values. So, the
number of variables must be exactly
matching if you are not using asterisk.
But now, of course, you could have here
less variables if you say, "You know
what? I'm going to have a middle and put
it with the asterisk." So, if you're
going to execute it, you will not get
any issues. Now, one more cool thing.
Let's say that I have only one item, but
actually I have two variables like this.
So, I have the first and let's say here
the rest. Now, if you go and execute it,
you will not get an error because Python
going to go and let me show you the
output so that to understand what is
going on here. So, print first, print
rest, and then execute. Look at this.
Python did put the first item in the
first and the rest going to be empty
because we don't have a rest, which is
totally fine. But of course, this only
works if you are using the asterisk. If
you remove it, then you must have two
items. Otherwise, you will get an error.
So, if you don't have a rest, that is
totally fine. You will get empty list.
Now, one more thing. Actually, it works
with anything that has a sequence. Like,
for example, I can have high. So, I have
here a string value and I can use the
unpacking to extract actually the
letters of the string. So, if you go and
execute it, it's going to put the H in
the first and the rest the I in a new
list. So, not only lists you can use
anything that is iterable or has
sequence. So, those are quickly the
rules on how to use unpacking.
All right. Moving on to the next one, we
have another trick with the unpacking.
We could go and use a special character
underscore. So, what this means. Now,
let's say that we have three values,
name, age, and the country. And now you
might say, you know what? I'm just
interested about the name and the
country. About the age, I don't want it.
Now, previously we have created like
three variables for it, name, age, and
country. But the thing is I've created
the age and I'm not using it at all. So,
it is something that I have to
I have to name it. It's going to take
space as well in my expensive memory and
I'm not using it at all. So, it is
totally wasting of resources. I just
want the first and the last name. Well,
actually there is solution from Python.
You can go and use an underscore in the
places where you don't need the values.
So, now instead of saying age, you can
go and use underscore and with that you
are not creating any variable and the
data will not be stored anywhere. So,
you are saying for Python, okay, for the
second position, I don't need anything.
Just throw it away. Of course, we are
not removing anything from the original
list. The only thing that we are not
extracting the second position, the age.
So, by looking to this, it is really as
well easy to read. You say, I need a
variable name, then after that I don't
care, then the third one I need a
country. So, this is really nice in
order to skip things and to put any
value in the trash that you are not
interested in. So now, let's try this
[clears throat] out. We have again our
four values and our four variables. And
now, I'm going to say, "You know what?
I'm interested with the name. I'm not
interested with the age, so you're going
to go and use an underscore. Now, maybe
for the role I want it, but I don't want
to see the country." So, I just want the
name and the role. Everything else is
not interesting. And of course, you
cannot go and print anything about the
age and the country because we don't
have variables for it. Now, if you go
and execute it, you can see I have Maria
and data engineering and everything else
is actually skipped. So, this is really
nice if you are interested only with few
information from your list, so you don't
have to go and come up with a variable
name for each thing. So, as you can see,
if you compare it with the asterisk, you
can go and use multiple underscores. So,
we are not limited to only one
underscore. Now, one more thing, we can
go and combine the power of the asterisk
and the underscore together in one. Let
me show you this example. So now,
imagine we have a lot of values in one
list and you say, "You know what? I'm
just interested with the first and the
last value and everything in between I
really don't care about it." So now,
before the asterisk, we have put it
everything in one variable. So with
that, you extracted the first and the
last and everything else is stored in
the middle variable. Now, the thing is I
really don't care about all those values
in the middle. I will never use it. So,
it is totally waste of space if I do
that. So now, how we going to fix it? If
you go and use only the underscore, you
have to add an underscore for each
variable in the middle, so it going to
be really annoying to go and add. You
might miss one and so on. You have to go
and count and make sure you have exactly
the same number of the underscores.
Instead, you can combine the power. So,
you put the asterisk at the start and
then underscore. So, treat the
underscore like any variable. So, with
that you are saying, "Okay, the rest,
everything in the middle, go and throw
it in the trash. I don't care about it.
Don't store it in my memory." So, again,
the asterisk is always for the rest and
think about the underscore, it's like,
"I don't want to define a variable and
use underscore in the places where you
don't need a variable." So, this is
awesome. Okay, so now let's go and try
this out. Again, I need the first item
and the last item. So, I'm going to say
here the country and now for country, so
that I get the first and the last and we
have to go and fix the middle. So, we're
going to say, "Okay, go grab the rest,
but don't put it in a variable, just
throw it away with the underscore." So,
now if we go and print the last one, the
country, and then execute, you will get
Maria, you will get Spain, and
everything in between will actually will
be wasted and will not be stored inside
the variable. So, this is really nice.
The same thing if you say, "You know
what? I just want the first item." So, I
just want the name. So, if we go and
execute it, you say, "Just give me the
first name and everything else, don't
put it anywhere. I need just need the
last item. Everything else, the rest is
not really needed." So, let's go and
execute it, you will get only Spain. So,
once you understand how it works, you
can control exactly which values you
want to extract from your list. So, it
is very flexible, quick, and easy. All
right, friends, now let's do a quick
recap. Unpacking it is exactly the
opposite of creating a list. Instead of
storing everything in one box, we use it
in order to start unpacking the item.
So, we take the item out of the list and
put it in different variables. And when
to use it? Usually, in our list, we have
different types of informations and we
use unpacking in order to make it for us
easier to work with each piece
separately. And to do unpacking, make
sure that you have the exact number of
variables that is matching the number of
values and items. And we use two special
characters, the asterisk, the star. We
use it in order to put the rest of the
items into new variable, new list. And
the underscore, we use it in order to
skip items if you don't care about the
item and the values. So, unpacking is
fun, flexible, and going to make your
life easier working with the items of
the list.
All right, guys. Now, we're going to
talk about something really interesting
in Python, how to analyze and check
items in the list. And now, the thing
is, if you have data, then you have to
analyze your data, right? So, that means
now we have to think like a data
analyst, and we have to start asking
quick questions like how big the list
is, what are the largest and the
smallest items, does the list actually
meeting the conditions and the rules in
our projects, and where do we find
specific value, and how we can summarize
the values. So, now let's go explore and
analyze the data of our list. Let's go.
Now, in Python, we have a lot of
functions like, for example, you could
use the max function to find the extreme
high, or you could use the opposite to
find the extreme low. Another function
we have the sum in order to find the
total. So, it's going to go and
summarize all the values. And if you
want to find how many items are inside
the list, we can use the length. So,
those analyzing functions going to give
you a quick snapshot to find high, low,
total, and count. And now, next we have
two cool functions, all and any. So, the
all going to ask the question, did
everything pass? So, are all the values
true? If yes, then you will get true,
otherwise false. And the second function
is any. It is like you are asking, did
something pass? So, if there is at least
one true, you will get true. So, those
two are your yes and no questions for
completeness and uniqueness. All good or
at least something good. Now, moving on,
we have as well methods. Like for
example, we could use the count in order
to tell how many times something shows
up or we could use the method index to
tell you where it first shows up. So,
those two functions going to help you to
search and count. And next, we could use
as well the operators to check
something. Like for example, the in in
order to check the existence of a value
inside the list or you could use the is
operator to check whether they are the
same object in the memory. So, with
that, we are checking the membership and
identity. Finally, we could go and use
the comparison operators like the equal
to check whether the two lists have the
same content. So, by looking to this, we
have a lot of tools to explore and
analyze our list. And inside the
toolbox, we have a lot of functions,
methods, and operators. So, now we're
going to go and cover all of them one by
one, and we will start with the
functions. Okay, so let's have a very
simple list of numbers like 1 5 2 4 3.
So, let's start with the first one.
Let's say that I would like to go and
find out what is the highest number in
my list. So, in order to do that, we
have very nice built-in function called
max. It's going to find you the highest
value. So, let's try this out. We're
going to say print. And now, since we
are saying it is built-in function, so
it's like the print. You're going to
write the function name and pass for it
your list. So, our list going to be
numbers. Let's try this out. Now, as you
can see, it is saying the highest number
is actually five, and this is true. So,
it is very simple. Now, let's say that I
would like exactly the opposite. I would
like to see what is the lowest value in
my list. And for that, we have the
built-in function min.
So, we're going to say min double
points, call the function min and pass
for it our list. So, let's try this out.
And as you can see, the lowest value in
our list is one. Okay, so now to the
next one. We have an aggregate function
called sum. You can use it in order to
summarize all the values of your list.
So, this is really nice for data
aggregations. We're going to say, "sum"
double points, and we're going to use
the function sum. For the same thing,
we're going to pass for it our list. So,
let's try this out. Now, you can see the
total of our values is 15. So, it is
really nice one. By the way, this will
not work if you have like string values.
So, if you go and execute it, you will
see this will not work. This works only
with the numbers. Moving on to the next
one, which is really important and nice
one. You can measure the length of your
list. And for that, we have the built-in
function length. So, let's try this out.
We're going to say, "length" then double
points, and the function going to be l e
n, and pass for it the numbers. So,
let's go and execute it. You will get
the total length of five. So, we have
five items inside our list. And of
course, this function works for any data
type. So, if you have here strings or
like boolean, you will still be able to
calculate the length of your string.
Okay, now moving on to two really
interesting functions in Python. We have
the all and any. The all function going
to check if all the items are true. That
means you have a real value in each item
of your list. If that's the case, you
will get true. Otherwise, you will get
false. So, let's try this out. And we're
going to say, "print" as you can say,
"all" double points, and then all and
our list. So, let's go and execute it.
Now, you can see it is giving us true
because we have a real value for each
item. But now, let's go and change that.
I will just copy and paste, but I'm
going to go and create a new list. So,
I'm going to create three items, one,
zero, and two. Now, if you go and
execute it, you will get false. And
that's because this function going to
consider the zero as missing value. So,
that means not all the items are true.
That's why you are getting false. And
the same thing for the string values.
So, let's say that we have here a and
then empty string and then B. So, if you
go and execute it, you will get as well
false because empty considered to be a
missing value. So, you will get false
for it. It will work only if you have
everywhere a real value. Like for
example here C. So, we have a real value
in each item. And if I go and execute
it, you will get true. So, all the items
must be true to get a true. Now, the
exactly opposite is the any. It is more
relaxed. You will get true if at least
you have one true value in your list.
So, let's try this out. I will go and
copy paste stuff. Now, let's go and test
first our original list. And I'm going
to say here any and in the output as
well any. So, if I go and execute it,
you will see I'm getting true because I
have an item in each value. Now, let's
go and test the second list here where
we have a zero which is not really good.
And I have to change this to any and
then execute it. So, now in the output
we now we are getting true. Before with
all we got false because we have one
missing value. But as the word any says,
it is at least to have one value. And
here it is more than enough. We have the
one and the two. That's why you are
getting true. And the same thing if you
go and get the string values over here
and say
any and here as well any and execute,
you will get true. The only way you will
get false with the any if all the items
are actually missing. So, you have zero
and here as well zero. And if you
execute this, you will get false because
the minimum is not fulfilled. You have
to have at least one value. So, as you
can see, those are really nice functions
in order to validate and check the
quality of your list. So, it going to
help you to find quickly any issues or
any gaps in your lists. So, those are
the Python built-in functions that you
could use in order to validate and
analyze something in your list. But, as
well in Python, we have two extra
methods that we could use in order to
analyze our list. So, we use counts as
the word says in order to calculate how
many times a specific value shows up in
your list. So, you are calculating the
appearance of specific value. So now,
for example, let's go and count times
the number five appears in my list. So,
we're going to go and print count double
points. And now, since we are talking
about methods, first you have to specify
the name of the variable. So, you can
say numbers, then dot, then the method
name. So, we're going to say count. And
now, we have to specify for Python the
value that should be counted. And here,
I want to check how many fives I have in
my list. And now, if you go and execute
it, you will get count one. So, we have
the five only once. So now, let's try
something else where I add another five
in my list. And if you go and execute
it, you will get count two. So, five
appears twice in my list. So, this is
really nice in order to find out whether
your values are unique or you have
duplicates in your list. Now, I said we
have two methods. The second one, we
have the method index. So, this function
is really amazing because it's going to
help you to find the position number of
the first time a value appears in your
list. So far, you remember in order to
find the index number or the position
number, we always counted like 0 1 2 3.
Now, of course, what you can do in
Python, you can give a value and Python
going to return the index number or the
position number. So, for example, I
would like to know the index number of
the value five. So, let's go and print
it and say index double points. This is
a method, so numbers dots index. And
now, you have to pass the value. So, I'm
searching for the index of the value
five. Now, if you go and execute it, you
will get index one, which is correct.
Look again to the list. So, we have zero
for the first item, and for our five, it
is position number one. And now you
might say, "But how about the second
five?" This function can return the
position for the first appearance of
your value. So, the second appearance
will not count. And by the way, the
index can return only the positive
numbers. So, you cannot retrieve the
negative numbers. So, they are easy and
fun, right? Okay, moving on. Not only
and methods, we could use as well
operators in order to check something.
Like for example, we could use the in
and the not in operators to check the
membership. And this is really nice in
order to double-check whether our value
is inside our list or actually it is
missing. So, let's try this out. Let's
say that I would like to check whether
in my list I have the number four. Now,
in order to do that, you're going to
say, "Is four in our list?" So, this is
very simple. We used it a lot in the for
loops. Now, of course, we have to go and
print this out. And let's see what can
happen. So, as you can see, it is true.
The output of the in operator is either
true or false, and Python did find it.
Now, let's try something else like for
example, eight. So, let's execute. You
can see false. Eight is actually not in
our list. And if you say, "Not in." So,
is eight not in the list? If you go and
execute it, you will get true. So, as
you can see, it is very simple. just
checking whether our value is a member
of our list. Of course, you can do that
as well with the string values. Now,
another check that we could do with
that, let's say that we have two lists.
So, this is list one, and let's have
another list. So, let's go and create
something like one, two, three.
And they're going to hold the same
informations.
Now, if you want to say, "You know what?
I would like to check whether those two
lists are actually identical. So, they
are holding the same values." What you
can do, you can go and use the equals to
operator. So, this is very simple. All
what you have to do is to say list one
equal to list two. So, let's try this.
As you can see, it is saying true
because those lists are identical. If
you go and make here like new item and
you execute, you will get false. So,
that means we can go and use the
comparison operators in order to check
two lists. And now, let's have another
example where we are comparing two
lists. Like, let's make here in the
second list we have five. Now, if you go
and use the comparison operator the
smaller and execute, you will get true.
So, now how Python actually saying one
list is smaller than the other one?
Well, actually, Python will not go and
check all the values. It is lazy. It's
going to go and check only the first
value between the two lists. So, now
we're going to go and compare is one
smaller than five? Well, it is true and
that's why Python going to stop and say,
yes, it is true. Now, of course, if you
say what happens if they are equal? And
here we have something like eight. So,
if you go and execute it, it going to
say false. Now, what happens at that?
Python going to check the first item.
Well, they are equal. Okay, let's go and
check the second item. Well, the first
list is higher than the second list.
That's why it is false and it's going to
stop. So, this is what can happen in
Python if you compare two lists. Now,
moving on to the next one, what can
happen if you use the is operator? So,
now let just make those two lists
identical and then execute, you will get
false. So, what is going on? They have
the same values. If I go and use equal
equal and execute, I'm getting true. But
now, if I use an is operator, why it
says it's false? Because those values
are actually identical, right? Now, the
is operator going to check the identity
of your items. Now, how Python going to
store those two lists? We going to have
two separate lists in the memory. And
the is operator don't care about the
values of your list. It going to check
whether they have the same memory
address. So, in that sense, we have
physically two different lists. Then,
their memory addresses are not equal.
So, it's like you are asking, are the
two lists actually pointing to the same
address? Well, if the variables are
pointing to the same data, then you will
get true. Otherwise, you will get false
if you have two separate objects. And
later, you are going to understand
exactly why do we need this operator as
we make copies of the lists. Guys, so as
you can see, we have a lot of functions,
methods, and operators that you could
use in order to do data analysis on top
of your data. So, with that, we can
learn from the data, and we can answer
quickly analytical questions, like what
is the size, the total, the extremes,
how to find specific item, how to
compare them, and of course, doing
exploration and data analysis, it is a
very important step before doing
anything complex. So, before you do
anything hard, you have to understand
the content of your list.
All right. So, now, so far, everything
that you have done is actually passive
things. So, how to read, how to check,
how to analyze. We are not changing
anything in the original list. But, the
thing is, in real projects, the data
going to change over the time. So, you
cannot maintain the original data in the
list. You have to go and do changes. And
usually, we have three types of changes.
You might get a new data, and you have
to go and add it to the list. Or maybe
after analyzing the data, you find some
old data, or let's say bad quality, and
you would like to go and remove it from
the list. Or you say, you know what?
Let's go and fix it actually. Let's go
and correct it. So, you're going to go
and update the content and the data of
your list. So, again, either adding,
removing, or updating your list. So,
now, we're going to learn how to add new
items to the list. And this is very
important in real data projects. You
will be having always a new data, like
new customers, new products. And over
the time you will be adding new items
and expanding your list with new data.
>> [music]
>> So, let's go.
Okay, so now we have our new value and
we would like to add it to the list. The
easiest way, or let's say the lazy way
to add it to the list, is to say, "You
know what? Just throw it to the end."
So, for that we use the method append.
If you use it, Python going to go and
add this new item to the end of the
list. And maybe later you want to add
another item and you use append, then
Python going to do the same thing. It
going to go and add it to the end. So,
it's like you are sticking and stacking
items always at the end. Okay, let's try
this out. Again, we have the list of the
letters and I would like to add new
values at the end. So, for that we have
to use the methods and as usual we start
with the variable name, then dots, and
our method is append. And here all you
have to specify is actually the value.
So, let's say I'm going to add an X at
the end. So, if you go and execute it,
you can see we have now a new member in
our list and exactly at the end. And now
we can go and add
another one. Append. This time I would
like to go and add Y. So, let's check
this out. Now, in the output you see we
have Y at the end of the list. So, this
is really easy. Now, with the append
actually that was really lazy one where
you just throw things at the end. But,
sometimes you would like to add specific
value at specific position. Maybe you
want to sneak a value in the middle or
at the start. And for that we have
another method called insert. Now, let's
say that I would like to have it between
the A and the B. For that you have to
specify for Python actually two things.
The first one is the position number and
this is totally normal. If you want to
change anything at specific position,
you have to tell Python where. So, now
in this example we want to put it at the
position number one. And the second
thing you have to tell Python which
value you want to add. So, if you use
this insert, Python going to put your
value between the A and B, exactly at
the position number one. Now, another
one, let's say that you would like to
add a value at the start of the list.
So, again, we need the two informations.
The position number going to be the
zero, and the value itself. If you do
that, you will be adding new value at
the start of the list. So, with that, as
you can see, you have to do more stuff
now. It's not lazy like the append, but
you have now more control on where
exactly you are adding your items. Okay,
so let's try this out. Let's start with
adding a value at the start. So, letters
dot. And here the method is insert. We
need two things, the position number, so
at the start it's going to be zero, and
then the value itself. So, let's say X.
Now, let's execute it. And as you can
see, we are having now the X at the
start. Let's say I would like to add
something between the B and C. So,
again, letters dot. And now insert. So,
now we have to find out the index
number, but you have to be careful. Now,
we have a new list because we've changed
it with the previous insert. So, now by
looking to the output, X is zero, one,
two, and then actually it is three. So,
I have to add a three here. And this is
really important to understand. Those
kind of methods are changing the
structure of our list. So, it is
directly affected and changed. So, let's
go and add a here a new value like Y,
and execute. Now, as you can see in the
output, we have Y between exactly B and
C. Okay, so this is how you deal with
the insert. And of course, we don't have
to forget about our 2D matrix. So, how
we can add stuff here? Let's say that I
would like to add one more list inside
our list. So, that means I need one more
row. In order to do that, we could use
append. So, what we're going to do, we
can say matrix dot append. And all what
you have to do is to give your new list.
So, let's say I'm going to say X, Y, and
Z. So, let's check this out. As you can
see, it is appending completely new row,
a new list inside our matrix. And if you
don't want to add it at the end, you
want to add it maybe at the start, then
you could use as well the insert
methods. So, we want it at the start,
that means we give it the position
number or the row number, and then you
give your list. So, this time maybe A,
another A, and third A. So, let's try
this out. Now, look at this, our new
list, new row is actually at the start.
So, it is very simple. This is how you
can add new list and rows to your 2D
matrix. Now, this is easy, but now let's
go to something little bit more complex.
Let's say that I would like to extend
this list here with a new member. I
would like to add at the end an X. So,
how we can do that? Let me just remove
this here, and I say, "You know what? I
want X." And I can still use the appends
because I want to add it at the end of
the list. So, now if I leave it like
this and execute, look here in the
output, you can see X is actually a new
row or a new member of the whole list.
But, this is not really what I want. I
wanted actually a member of the second
list. So, what happened here? Now, by
looking back how Python stores the data,
with this syntax currently we are
targeting the first list, and we said
append to it an X. So, Python did create
a new pointer to a new object called X.
So, that means Python is actually
extending the whole list, the first
objects. But, what we want is to extend
actually the child, the sublist. And if
you want to do that, then you have to
target the correct list because Python
works with one level at a time. So, in
order to fix it, you have to specify
which list by adding the brackets and
saying the row number one. And if you do
that, then Python going to target the
correct list and extend it exactly where
you want. So, let's try this out. I'm
going to go over here and say, "You know
what? Go to the index number one." So,
with that Python is targeting this row,
and then we are saying append to this
row an X. So, if you go and execute it,
you can see in the output, it is
correct. Now, X is member of the second
list. Now, let's try one more thing.
Let's say that I would like to target
the first list. So, let's say I would
like to add a Z at the start. We can do
that. So, matrix, and now we are
targeting the first row. So, that means
the index going to be zero. And now, we
cannot use append because I want to add
it to the start. So, we're going to go
and use the insert. And now, we have to
give the index position where the new
data going to be inserted. So, I want it
as well to be inserted at the start, and
my value going to be Z. So, let's try
this out. Now, look at this. We have a
new value at the start of the first
list. So, as you can see, it is very
simple. Just do it step by step, and be
careful what you are targeting, in which
level you are doing the changes. All
right. So, with that, you have learned
how to add a new items either using the
append. This is very simple. You want to
add an item at the end of the list. So,
you are stacking new things to the list,
or you use the insert if you want to
have more control. You want to sneak an
item into a specific spots. So, this is
really important. In each real data
projects, you will be having new data
over the time, like new customers, new
products, new orders, and you have to
keep expanding and adding new items to
your list.
All right, friends. So, now we're going
to keep talking about how to change the
data of our list. So, now instead of
adding something new to our list, we're
going to talk about how to remove items
from the list. And this is something
very common that's going to happen after
you analyze and explore your data. You
might find out some old data, or maybe
duplicates that makes no sense. Or in
worst scenario, you might find some bad
data that is corrupting actually your
list. So, you want to go and clean up
your data by removing those bad data.
And of course, there are different ways
and methods on how to remove things from
your list. So now, let's dive in. Okay,
the first option and the easiest one if
you say, "You know what? I would like to
get rid of everything." So, I would like
to delete and clear all the items, and I
would like to get back to an empty list.
So, for that, you have the method clear.
If you use it, it's like you are hitting
the reset button, and in one shot, you
would like to remove all the items. So,
sounds fun, right? Okay, let's try this
out. Again, we have our nice list, and I
would like to go and remove everything.
like to have it as an empty. So, all
what you have to do is to use the
methods clear, and of course, we don't
have to pass anything for it because we
are just now destroying. So, let's go
and execute it. As you can see in the
output, we are getting back our empty
list. So, this is really
straightforward. It is always easy to
destroy things compared to building
them. But now, sometimes you don't want
to go and throw everything away. You
want to pick one specific value and
remove it from the list. For that, you
have two methods. The first one is
removing by value. So, all what you have
to give Python is the value that you
want to remove, and if you do that,
Python going to start searching for this
value, and once it finds the first
match, it's going to go and remove it.
And after that, it's going to stop. It
will not keep searching for a match. So,
in this example, it will not go and
remove the second B, only the first
match. So, this is how you remove by
value using remove. Okay, so let's try
this out. I'm going to go and change
something here. We're going to have a
list like this, A, B, and again A. In
order to have duplicates. Now, I would
like to remove by value. So, I would
like to remove the A. So, all what you
have to do is to use the methods remove,
and of course, we need the value that
you are searching for. And in this
example, we want to remove the A. So,
let's try and execute it. Now, as you
can see, Python did remove the first A
because this is the first match. So,
Python found it and removed it from the
list. And look at this, we still have an
A at the end because Python is removing
only the first match. And if you say,
"Yeah, I would like to remove as well
the second A." then you have to repeat
the instruction. So, you have to say
twice remove A. So, let's try this out.
So, look at this. We have only B. The
first instruction removed the first A
and the second one removed the second A.
So, this is how the remove function
works. Okay, moving on to the last way.
If you say, "You know what? I really
don't care about the value. I want to
remove something that is sitting on
specific spot. So, I'm more interested
on the position number. Like, I would
like to remove the first item or the
last item or exactly something in the
middle." And for that, we have a method
called pop. So, now for example, let's
say that I would like to go and remove
the first item. So, again here we have
to tell Python exactly the position
number. So, it's going to be the index
zero. So, if you give pop zero, Python
going to go to the first position and
remove it from the list. So, as you can
see, Python is not anymore searching for
a specific value. It is going directly
to the index number and removing it. And
if you want to remove something from the
middle, all what you have to do is to
specify the index number. And there's
something here really cool about the
pop. If you don't specify any index
number, the default going to be always
the last item. So, if you say pop
without giving any number, Python going
to go to the last item and remove it.
And one more thing that is really
interesting about the pop is that it
will not just remove the item, but as
well it going to return the removed item
to you. So, with that you have the
chance to understand what is removed and
as well maybe to do something about it.
So, this nice method, the pop, is
actually doing two things. It is
changing your list and as well it is
returning something back to you. Okay,
so now let's play with this method. I
would like to go and remove now the last
item. So, as usual, letters. And our
method going to be pop. And since it is
the last item, I don't have to specify
anything. It's going to be the default.
So, let's try this out and execute. As
you can see, we are getting now A and B
and we don't have the C. But as we
learned, it is not only removing but as
well it is returning the removed item.
So, let's try this out. I would like to
go and create a new variable to store
the returned value. So, I'm going to say
removed and then I would like to print
it. So, print
removed item double points and then our
new nice variable removed. So, let's try
this out. Now, as you can see, the
removed item is C. This is really cool.
So, it is changing my list and as well
returning. Now, let's say that I would
like to go and remove actually the first
item. So, this time we cannot leave it
empty. That's why we're going to go and
specify the first index going to be
zero. And if you go and execute it, you
can see we don't have any more A and the
removed item is A. Now, let's try
something else like something in the
middle. Let's remove the B. It's going
to be the index one. And if you go and
execute it, look at this, we don't have
B and the removed item here is B. So, it
is easy. And of course, we have to talk
about how to remove stuff from our
matrix. So, that means I want to remove
by value. So, we're going to use the
method remove and then specify the whole
list. So, A,
B
and C. Let's try this out. Now, look at
the output. We don't have this list
anymore. So, we are removing by value.
Okay, let's take another example where I
want to say, you know what, let's go and
remove the last list. So, now since we
don't care about the values, we are
removing by the position. So, I want to
remove the last one. We're going to go
and use the pop. And since it is the
last one, we're going to use the default
so I don't have to specify anything. So,
let's try this out. And with that, the
only list that is inside my list going
to be this one here. So, we removed the
last list. Okay, so this is how you
remove a complete row, a complete list.
Now, let's go go the next level where I
want to remove one specific value. Like
for example, I would like to remove this
one value, the A. How we going to do it?
We're going to say matrix. Now, of
course, we have to tell Python where to
search. Now, if you say remove E, and
then you execute, you will get an error.
So, what happens here? So, now if you
look to this, we are trying to remove a
string value from the big list. But here
there's an issue. The big list has
pointers only to an object that is list.
So, we are not pointing to is telling
you, you cannot remove string from this
list. But now if you want to do it
correctly, you have to go to the child,
and then there you tell Python to remove
the E because it is pointing to string
values. So, let's see how we can correct
this. The issue is over here. We are
trying to remove E from the whole
matrix. Well, this is wrong. I have to
specify for Python exactly in which row
it should search. So, now it should
search from the row one, right? So,
we're going to go and say one. Now we
are saying from the row one, go and
search for E, and if you find it, remove
it. Of course, for the first match. So,
let's execute it. Now look at this, in
the second list, we don't have any more
the value E. Okay, so let's try another
thing. I would like to remove the first
item from the last row. So, I'm not
removing by values, I'm removing by
position. So, let's say matrix. Since
I'm saying the last row, I can go and
use the minus one. So, it is the last
list in the matrix, or you can go and
use the two, of course. And then I will
not go and use the remove. This time
we're going to use the pop since we are
interested with the position number. So,
I want to remove the first item. That
means the zero. So, I am actually over
here at the G. Now, look at this. This
is our last list, and we have removed
the first item of the last list. So, it
is nice. Let's go and remove the last
item of the first list. So, now in order
to do it, I want to target the first
list. It is always the index zero. And
now I want to remove the last item. So,
that means I'm going to use pop. Since
we are removing by position and we are
removing the last item. So, that means I
don't have to specify anything. As you
can see, in the first list, we don't
have C. So, we removed the last item
from the first list. It just need little
practice and then you going to get it.
All right. So, with that you have
learned everything on how to remove
things from your list either by hitting
the reset button where you wipe out the
list and you remove everything from the
list. Or you say, "This is very extreme.
I just want to remove one specific
thing." And here there are two ways.
Either removing by value using the
method remove. Or you say, "I don't care
about the value. I know exactly where to
remove. So, I'm going to remove by
position using the pop method." And of
course, by default going to remove the
last item. But if you use an index, you
could go for example and remove the
first item. So, that's now you have
enough tools to clean up your list by
removing old data or maybe duplicate
data. And in the worst scenario,
removing bad data from your list.
>> [music]
>> All right, friends. Now we're going to
go to the last operation that you could
do on your list. We can go and update
our data. So, now again, after you
analyze and check your data, you might
find something wrong. Maybe duplicates
or let's say corrupt data. But this time
you say, "You know what? I don't want to
go and throw it away from the list.
Actually, there is a chance to fix it."
So, all what you have to do is to go and
update the content of my data and then
everything going to be fine. Or maybe
the data itself change over the time.
Like for example, the customer has new
email. Or maybe the price of the
products got updated to something
higher. Or maybe your employee just
moved from one city to another city. So,
that means data always get changed over
time and we have to learn how to update
it. So, that means my friends, we going
to learn now how to keep our list
up-to-date. So, let's dive in. Okay, so
now the question is how we can update
the value of an item in a list in
Python. Well, we don't have a dedicated
methods to update values. Instead, we
can use the assign operator. So, all
what you have to do is to specify for
Python what should be changed using the
brackets and the indexing. So, here for
example, the index two, and then use the
equal operator, and then tell Python
what is the new value. So, once you do
that, Python going to go to the position
number two, remove the old value, and
add the new value. So, with that you
have updated the content of the index
number two. So, that's it. All what you
are doing here is actually overriding
the value. Okay, so let's try this out
with our nice example here. I would like
to update the value of the first item
with a new value. So, all what you have
to do is first specify the index number.
The first value going to be the zero.
And now in order to assign the new
value, we use the equal, and then
specify whatever you want, like for
example, an X. Let's try this out. Now,
look at the output. Instead of A, we
have X. So, we didn't add, we didn't
remove anything, we just updated the
content of the list. Same thing if you
want to update the next one, you're
going to say letters one equal, for
example, Y. So, let's try this out. With
that, we updated the second item. And of
course, be careful what you are
updating. So, for example, if you go and
say letters are equal to Z without
specifying an index at all, and if you
run it, you will see it Afterwards, we
will get Z. So, we don't have any more
any list. And if you go and print the
type now
of the letters, so let's execute. You
can see now the variable is actually a
string value, and we don't have any more
a list. So, we have updated the content
of the whole variable. So, letters is
not any more a list, it is now a string
value. So, be careful what you are
updating. If you just want one value,
you have to specify an index, otherwise
you are updating the whole list.
So now, as usual, we have to practice
always with the matrix. Now, let's say
that I would like to go and update
actually the last list. So, all the
values are wrong and I would like to get
a new list instead of those values. So,
we're going to say matrix and now we
have to be careful. If I leave it like
this, what can happen? We can update the
whole matrix. We don't need that. I want
to update the last row. So, we have
[snorts] to tell Python that. Now, the
last row, either you say two or I like
to have the minus one. And now, what can
happen for the last row? We are
assigning completely new values. So,
we're going to say X,
Y,
and Z. So, that's it. Let's try this
out. Now, as you can see in the output,
the last list has now new values. So,
Python did remove this list and replaced
it with a new one that we assigned.
Easy, right? Now, let's go to the next
level. I would like to update one
specific value in specific row. So, for
example, let's update the first value of
the first list. So, let's go and do
that. And since we are talking about the
first item, it's going to be as well
zero. So, now we are targeting the first
item in the first list and we're going
to go and assign, for example, I'm going
to go with like a special character,
minus. So, let's try this out. Now, look
at this. The first item of the first row
is now changed. Now, let's go and target
this middle one over here. It's going to
be simple. Matrix, we are speaking about
the row number one and we are speaking
about the value at the position number
one as well. So, let's go and give it
another minus and execute. As you can
see, the middle value as well changed.
Now, let's go to the last one. I would
like to update the last value in the
last list. Going to be matrix minus one
and we give it a minus. So, let's
execute. With that, we change as well
the last item of the last list. So, as
you can see, it is fun, it is easy. You
can easily update a matrix in Python.
All right, friends. So, that's it. This
is how you can update and correct your
data. And with that, my friends, we have
learned everything on how to modify and
change the original data of your list by
adding, removing, and updating. And this
is, of course, very important as the
data change over the time.
All right, friends. So, now we come to
something very essential in any data
project of that. You have to learn how
to order your data. So, the thing is,
now you might say, "Okay, my data inside
the list is actually up-to-date. There
is no change needed." But, the issue is
that the data is chaotic. It is not
organized. So, I have to go and organize
it, rearrange it, change the order of
the items inside my list. And, of
course, this is very important in real
applications. Like, for example, if you
want to create ranking where you are
sorting the products by the most
expensive price. So, you want to sort it
from the highest to the lowest. Or,
maybe you have a list of customer names,
and you would like to sort it and
organize it where you sort everything
alphabetically, and it's going to be
easier to read and navigate. So, that
means ordering the data is something
very essential in any real data
projects. And now, we're going to learn
how to do that in Python for your
[music] list. So, now, let's dive in.
All right. Now, let's say that we have
the following list. So, 4 2 5 1. Of
course, you might say this looks not
really good. So, we can reorganize it by
changing the order in specific way. And
for that, we can use the method sort. If
you use it, the items going to be sorted
from the smallest to the biggest. So, 1
2 4 5. And, of course, if you have
letters, it's going to sort it from A to
Z. And we call this way of sorting data
ascending. Okay. So, let's try this out.
We're going to have the following, let's
say, letters. I'm going to start with C,
then A, and then the last one going to
be B. Now, of course, this is chaotic
and I would like to sort it. Now, the
first method we could use the sort
method, and if you leave it empty, then
we're going to sort it ascending from A
to Z, from lowest to highest. So, now
let's try this out. So, now look at
this. The data is already sorted in a
nicer way. But now, sometimes you might
need exactly the opposite. So, you want
to sort the data from the biggest to the
smallest. So, for that, we still going
to use the same method sort, but inside
it we're going to give it another
argument. So, we're going to use the
keyword reverse, and then we're going to
say it is equal to true. So, if you do
it like this, you will get first 5 4 2
1. And if you have letters, it's going
to be from Z to A. So, it is the same
idea, but we just change the direction.
Okay, back to our example. Here again,
we have our unsorted list, the chaotic
one, and I would like to go and sort it,
but this time from the highest to the
lowest. So, we're going to still use the
method sort. But now, since we want it
descending, we have to go and use the
keyword reverse equal to true. So, let's
go and try this out. Now, as you can
see, the list is sorted from the
highest, the C, then the lowest, B, and
then the last one going to be the A. So,
from Z to A. So, actually, that's it.
And of course, we have always to
practice with our matrix. So, we have
our matrix here, and I'm just going to
go and change the order of the lists,
maybe something like this. Now, if you
say, "You know what? Let's go and sort
our matrix." What going to happen? So,
{dot} sort, and let's just run it. So,
now look at this. Our matrix actually
got sorted. So, now of course, the
question is, how Python is sorting a
list inside another list? Well, the
thing is, Python will not go and check
all the values of each list. Instead,
Python going to go and compare only the
first item of each list. So, actually,
Python is comparing the D with the G and
the A, and based on the first element,
it's going to go and sort the data. So,
since A is the lowest, it's going to be
the first list, And after that comes the
D, and the last one going to be the G.
So, Python is sorting actually by the
first item. But now, let's play around
and say, "You know what? We have two
lists that start with the same
character, but the second one is
actually Z, and one here we have A. So,
does Python going to sort it based on
the second item?" Let's see what going
to happen. Well, look at this. If they
both start with the same item, then
Python going to go and check the second
item. But again, will not keep checking
the rest. It's only if the items are
actually equal. So, this is how Python
sorts multiple lists. So now, if you
say, "I don't want to sort the lists, I
would like to sort the items in specific
row." Like for example, I would like to
sort the data in the second row. So, in
order to do that, remember, you have to
target the correct list. So, you have to
go to the row number one, and then say
sort. So, I'm telling Python, "Sort only
the row number one." Let's go and
execute it. Now, as you can see, the
lists are actually not sorted. It's only
the items of the second list is sorted.
So, it is like anything else, right?
Okay. So now, so far, all what we have
done is actually we have changed the
order of the items of the original list.
But now, if you don't want to touch the
original list, you want a clean
temporary copy of the list where there
the data is sorted correctly. And for
that, we don't use methods, we use a
function called sorted. So, it sounds
similar, but it is a function. So, you
can use it in order to leave the
original list as it is, but you create a
new copy where everything is organized.
Okay. So, back to our example. This
time, I don't want to change anything in
the original list, but I would like to
make an extra copy that is more clean
and sorted. So, in order to do that, we
have to create a new variable. So, let's
call it new list, something like that.
And then, we can use this time the
function sorted. So, it's not a method.
And we have to pass for it now the
variable, the original list, the
letters. So, you see already the
difference. The previous one called
sort, the function called sorted and it
is a function not a method. So, now
let's go and execute it. As you can see
in the output, we still have the letters
unorganized. So, nothing actually
changed. Now, in order to see the
organized list, you have to print the
new list. So, let's go and see. I'm
going to call the first one actually,
original list double points and and the
next one going to be sorted list and
this going to be our new list. So, let's
go and execute it. So, now look at this,
the original list is actually unchanged.
So, nothing is sorted here, but the new
list, the sorted list, you can see the
same items, but they are sorted from the
lowest to the highest. And of course, if
you want to sort it from the highest to
the lowest, in order to do that, we're
going to use the same arguments and
we're going to say reverse equal to
true. So, let's go and execute it. Now,
you can see in the output the sorted
list is actually sorted descending from
the highest to the lowest. So, it is
very similar to the method sort, but
only difference here is that you are
making an extra copy and you are not
changing the original list.
>> [music]
>> So, now we come to something that might
confuse at the start. Let's say that you
don't care about the value itself of the
list. So, you don't want to look at the
data itself. All what you want to do is
just to flip the list around. For that,
we have a nice method called reverse.
So, here be careful, it is something
else than the argument that we used in
the sort. Now, we have a dedicated
method called reverse. If you use it,
it's going to flip everything around.
So, the first becomes last, the last
becomes first. So, actually there is
like no sorting logic involved. You are
just reversing the list. Okay, so let's
try it out. Again, we have our list and
this time we're going to go and flip it
around using the method reversed. So,
letters.
reverse and actually that's it. Let's go
and execute it. Look at this, everything
is flipped around. The first item C is
now the last item and the last item B is
now the first item. So, it is fun,
right? This is exactly how it works. And
now here again we have the same scenario
as the sort. We can do the reverse on an
extra copy so that we don't change the
original list. So, let me show you how
this going to looks like. Since it is a
function, we're going to go and create a
new list because it going to return a
new list. So, we're going to call the
function reverse and then we're going to
pass for it our original list, the
letters. So, now we have two lists and
we're going to go and print them. So,
the first one going to be the original
list
and the second one going to be our
reversed
list. So, let's add double points and
here it's going to be from the new list.
So, let's try this out. Wow, look at the
output. We are getting some cryptical
values over here. Well, this is not
anymore our original list. It says it is
an iterator. Well, it is not exactly
like the sorted. Python will not create
a new list. It going to create another
type of object called iterator and of
course we're going to learn about this
type of object in the advanced topics.
But now of course we can get back our
list if you go and convert the data type
from iterator to list by using the
function list. So, if you do it like
this and then execute, you will see in
the output our list but everything is
flipped around. So, it is not anymore
the scary iterator. It is a normal list.
So, again you use the method if you want
to change directly the original value.
But if you don't want that, you want to
do it in an extra copy, then use the
function reversed. All right, friends.
So, with that you have learned
everything on how to organize and order
the items of your list. And here we have
a lot of methods and functions. So, you
could use sort without anything in order
to sort from the smallest to the
highest, or you can use the keyword
reverse equal to true if you want the
opposite from the highest to the lowest,
or you can go and use the function
sorted in order to create a new sorted
version without touching the original
list. And we have learned as well we
could use the method reverse in order to
flip the list around. And as well we
have for this a function called reversed
in order to create an extra list but
backward without changing the original
one. So, those stuff are really
important to organize your data and as
well maybe to create some nice ranking
in your data.
All right, friends. So, now in real
project actually we don't go directly
and change the data and the content of
our list of the original data because
maybe you are just experimenting and
testing stuff. You are not yet sure and
you don't want to lose the original
data. So, you don't go directly and
change stuff. Instead, what we usually
do with that, we make our own separate
version. So, that means we go and copy
the data from the original list and we
put it in a new list. In the new copy,
you can do whatever you want. So, you
can do changes, you manipulate the data,
and if things goes wrong, it's fine
because you still have your original
data. And this is as well very cool if
you have both of them. So, you have the
modified data and you have the raw data,
you can go and compare them in order to
check whether you didn't lose any
informations, you didn't lose any items
after the modifications. So, there are a
lot of benefits and a lot of reasons why
we have to go and create our own copy.
And my friend, creating a new copy in
Python, especially for the data
structure like list, it is something
really tricky, especially for beginners.
And there are a lot of methods and ways
on how to do that and you have always to
understand the effect. Are you really
copying in data or are you making a
reference? So, that's why you're going
to deep dive now [music] into the
different methods step by step. So,
don't worry about it. Let's go.
Okay, the first method is to use [music]
assignment with equals. So, again we
have our original list over here. And
now what we can do, we can go and create
a new variable and then assign it to the
original list using the equals. Now, of
course, it is very important to
understand what going to happen. Am I
getting a real copy or just a reference?
Now, if you do the assignment like this,
what going to happen, Python will not go
and create a new copy. So, there is no
new list. All what can happen is that
the new variable going to be referencing
to the same list. So, that's we have now
two variables pointing to the same list,
to the same data. So, of course, if you
go and add an item to the first list
variable, then what can happen, it going
to go and change the same list. And this
means the other variable, the copy
variable, going to be as well affected
because they have the same source of
data. So, actually, if you are using
assignment, you are making a reference.
You are not making any extra copy. Okay?
So, let's try this out. Again, we have
our original list and I would like to
make a copy out of it. So, in order to
do that, we're going to go and create a
new variable, letters copy. And now for
this new variable, I will not go and
create something from the scratch. I'm
going to say, "You're going to get your
value from the letters." So, I'm
assigning the original list to the new
variable. Now, let's go and print this
out. We're going to say letters copy and
maybe add a text, so copy double points.
And same thing here
original.
Okay, so let's go and execute it. So,
that we have copied one list to another
list. So, now what is really interesting
to see, what can happen if I change
something on the copy. So, let's go and
add a new item to the letters copy. And
we're going to say append, for example,
the character Z. So, let's go and
execute it. Now, look at this. We see
now the new item in both of the lists.
Well, as we learned, it is only one
list, and any change that you are doing
to it, it can be reflected in both
variables. So, the same thing, if I go
to the original one, I say letters, and
let's say I'm going to go and remove the
last item. So, we are removing the C.
Let's go and execute it. Look at this.
We don't have C in both of the
variables. So, as you can see, if you
want to copy one list to another using
the assignment, it is risky. It is not
safe because if you change anything
anywhere, it's going to go and affect
all other variables. So, be careful with
assignment.
>> [music]
>> Okay, so now, how we going to fix this?
>> [music]
>> I don't need a reference. I need a real
extra copy because I would like to go
and play with the data in the copy
without affecting the original list. So,
in order to do that, we going to use the
method copy. If you do it, what can
happen? Python going to really create a
new container, a new list that is
independent from the original list. And
of course, each variable going to be
pointing to its own list. So, now, if
you go and remove an item from the copy,
it will not affect the original list
because they are independent from each
others. So, with that, it is way safer,
and you can do whatever you want with
the copy without affecting the original
data. All right, let's try this out.
Again, we have our original list, and we
are trying to copy it to another new
variable. Now, previously, we just done
a simple assignment, but it is risky.
That's why we going to go and try with
the copy methods. So, we are saying,
create an extra copy for the new
variable. So, let's try this out. In the
output, we going to see the exact same
list in the copy. Now, what is
interesting is to modify things. So,
first, I'm going to go and modify the
copy itself by adding new character. So,
we are appending the Z. So, let's try
this out. Now, as you can see, it is
changing only the copy because we have a
real extra copy. We don't have any more
a reference. So, that means the change
is going to happen only on the copy, not
on the original one. Now, let's go and
change something in the original by
removing the last character, the C. So,
let's try this out. As you can see, the
C disappeared from the original list,
but not from the copy. And this is way
more safer than just doing assignments.
>> [music]
>> And of course, as usual, we have to
check the matrix whether everything is
fine there. So, again, we have this
matrix, but I'm going to go and make it
a little bit smaller. So, I'm going to
go and remove one row and one level of
the items. So, A, B, C, and D. So, this
is our original matrix. Now, let's go
and copy it to a new variable. So, we're
going to say matrix copy
equal to the matrix, but of course,
we're going to go and use the copy since
it is more safe. And we're going to go
and print both of them. So, original,
then we're going to go and print as well
the copy.
So, copy, then matrix copy. So, let's
try this out and execute. Look at this.
We have a new copy of our matrix. So,
now it's time to test whether everything
is fine. We're going to go and remove
the last row from the original matrix.
So, let's try this out. Perfect. As you
can see, the row removed from the
original, but not from our copy. Now,
let's try something else. We're going to
go and add a new value to the copy for
the first row, the first list. So,
remember how to do it. First, we're
going to go and call the variable, and
then since we are talking about the
first row, it's going to be the zero.
And we'd like to add, so we're going to
go with the append the new value Z. So,
let's try this out. Uh-oh, we have an
issue. Why do we have a Z as well in the
original? Didn't we say they are like
isolated lists? So, what is going on?
Well, my friend, in Python the method
copy considered to be a shallow copy.
So, what is that? So, it looks like
this. Remember the matrix? You have the
top level where you have a list pointing
to another lists. So, this is the top
level, the parent, and then you go to
the next level deeper to the child's
where you have lists that actually
pointing to the real data. So, with that
we have two levels. Now, if you go and
use the method copy in order to copy the
whole nested list to a new variable.
Now, what going to happen Python going
to take the top level and copy it
completely to the new variable. So, that
you have like two variables pointing to
different lists. So, you have a real
copy, but the issue is that they will be
pointing to the same children. So, for
the next level, that deeper level, you
will not have a real copy. So, that
means you don't have a complete copy for
all the levels. You going to get only
the copy for the top level, the first
one. And this is what we call a shallow
copy. It is not that deep, right? And
now, of course, if you go and do any
change to that deeper level, of course,
it going to go and affect both of the
copies because they are referencing to
the same data. And if you go and change
anything to that top level, it will not
be reflected in the other list because
only that top level is actually
independent. So, this is the issue with
this method that copy, it is a shallow
copy. Now, how we going to fix it? Well,
actually we don't have any function and
methods in the built-in module that can
help us with that. We need to bring in
some extra help, and that's going to
come from completely different model
called the copy model. And inside it we
have two nice functions. The first one
is called copy, and the second one,
which is really interesting, we have the
deep copy. So, now if you use this
function, what going to happen is that,
unlike that shallow copy, the deep copy
going to go layer by layer copying
everything no matter how deep is your
nested list. So that you are 100% sure
you have completely independent copies
from the lists. There is no pointers,
there are no references, and you don't
have to worry anymore about your
original data. So that means deep copy
is the safest way in order to create a
copy. So it is completely independent.
You don't have to worry. All right, so
let's try out our new module. So first
we have to go and import it. Import
copy. So with that we are installing
this module only for this script. And
now we are allowed to use anything
inside it. So let me just remove all
those stuff here. And as well let's go
and remove the built-in copy. So now how
we going to use something from our new
module? First you have to write the
module name. So copy. So that Python
understand uh-huh. Anything comes after
it is actually belongs to the module
copy. Now after the module name we going
to call the function name that is inside
the copy. So we're going to use the deep
copy function. And since it's function
we're going to go and pass for it the
list, the original list. So let's try
this out. Now look at this. The copy is
working but of course we cannot trust
this without testing. So let's try again
by removing one item from the original
list and execute. Perfect. As you can
see we changed something in the original
list but it didn't affect the copy. So
that means they are not referencing each
other. They are really independent
lists. Now of course we're going to go
one more deeper in order to check the
childs. So now what we're going to do
we're going to test as well by adding a
new member to the first row but only to
the copy. So that means I expect to see
the new value Z only on the copy and not
in the original. So let's try this out.
Perfect. So as you can see it is
working. We have changed a child without
affecting the original list. So that
means the function deep copy going to
make real independent physical new copy
of the original one. So, everything, all
the levels, no matter how nested is your
list. So, it is completely safe and
there is no connection between the
copies and the original values. So, it
is the safest methods. Okay, one last
quick thing about the copy that inside
this module we have another function
called just copy. So, it is not a deep
one. Let's go and try this out over
here, copy. So, the first one is
actually the module name, the second one
is the function name. Now, this function
is exactly like the method copy. It is a
shallow copy, that means it is only
copying the top level, but the same
issue it going to be referencing to the
same childs. So, if you use it for the
list, you going to get exactly the same
results. Let me just show you quickly.
So, just remove those stuff and execute.
So, we are getting the same results.
Now, if you go deep and change something
on the childs, what going to happen? It
going to affect as well the original
copy. So, the child are referenced. Now,
of course, you going to say, "What is
then the difference between the method
copy and the function copy?" For the
data structure list, there is no
differences at all. It is just something
that going to give you flexibility with
other types. As we learned, methods like
the copy belongs always to specific
class, but the functions are always like
all purpose, like generic. So, that's
why Python offers as well the copy as a
function. If you have a struggle with
other data types where, for example, the
tuple class doesn't have the methods
copy. So, for this case, you going to go
and use the function copy from the
module copy. So, that means if you have
a methods called copy, just go and use
it. It is quicker, but if you don't have
it, then you have to import the copy and
use the function copy. So, this is why
we have [music] it. By the way, friends,
if you'd like to have an access to all
those sketches and my notes for Python,
you can find my Python handbook. There
you going to see around 200 pages, only
sketches and notes about the course. You
can check the link in the description.
Now, let's go back to the course.
All right. Now, I'm going to show you
something cool on how to check whether
you have like two independent lists or
they are sharing something. Previously,
we checked by adding and removing stuff
in order to test, but there is a smarter
way on how to do it using the is
operator. Okay, so let's see how we can
do that. Currently, we have our original
nested list and let's start with the
first way, assignment.
So, it is very simple. We're going to
say copy one equal to original. Okay, so
with that we have two variables pointing
to the same objects. Now, we want to
check that, right? In order to do that,
what we can do, we can say very simply
is the original is copy one. So, I'm
asking, are they like pointing and
referencing to the same object in the
memory? So, if you go and execute it,
you will get true. Well, yes, both of
them are referencing to the same object.
So, this is the first level. I'm going
to go and add here something, same
object.
And then we have the check over here.
And at the end, I'm going to go and
print a new line. So, if you go and
execute it, you will get true. Well,
yes, both of them are referencing to the
same object. So, let's go to the next
one and we're going to test the shallow
copy.
So, very simple, copy two equal
original, but this time with a method
copy. And we're going to print the same
thing, but using the copy two. So,
again, we are asking the same question.
Are those two lists identical? Are they
sharing the same objects? So, let's go
and test that. Well, this time you are
getting false. So, that means each
variable is pointing to a different
object in the memory. They are not
identical. And as you can see, this is
really nice, right? But now, what we can
check as well, we can check the
children, right? So, let's go deeper.
We're going to say print shared lists.
So, are they sharing anything? This time
we're going to say original, but we have
to check the row. So, for example, you
can pick any row like the first row over
here, and then you say is copy two
and as well the same row. Are they
sharing the same child? And we print a
new line, and actually I don't need this
one over here. So,
let's try this out. Now, as you can see,
they are sharing the same child, the
same list. So, again, they are not
sharing the same objects, but deeply
they are sharing same lists, which is
not really cool. So, let's go to the
last level, deep copy. So, copy three
equal this time from the module copy, I
would like to use deep copy, and then
pass to it our original list. So, we're
going to go and do the same prints over
here.
I want to check whether they are sharing
the same object and the same child, but
here we have to target the copy three.
Same thing here. So, look at this for
the first one is false. They are not
sharing the same objects, and as well,
deeply they are not sharing the same
list. So, actually Python is storing the
first rows in different objects. So, my
tip for you after you copy anything, go
and check. Use the is operator to
understand whether they are referencing
to the same object or not. So, this is
really smart thing to do. All right,
friends. So, now let's do a quick recap.
I'm going to say, "Don't just go use the
assignment. It is very confusing and
risky. I try to avoid it." Now, about
the methods, I usually go with the
method copy because only if I have a
simple list, one dimension, there are no
nesting. So, for that, it is more than
enough. I don't have to go and import
anything. It is quick, and don't worry
about it. It's going to be safe as long
as you don't have nesting. But of
course, I'm going to go and use the deep
copy if I have nesting, I have a matrix.
I'm just want to make sure that I'm
really creating completely independent
list with the parent list and with the
all childs. So I don't need any shared
references. I don't want any surprises.
So with that you have learned all the
methods on how to make an extra copy of
the original data in order to experiment
and to do your tests and without having
the feeling and the risk of losing the
raw original data.
All right, my dear friends. Now we're
going to move to the next advanced thing
that we usually do with our data is that
we can go and combine our data. Well, in
real projects we dream about it where we
have one simple list where all your data
is packed perfectly together. In reality
your data going to be spreaded around in
different data structures and maybe
lists like the customer information in
one list, the products in another, the
orders in third. And now my friend your
job is to go and bring them all together
and combine them in one [music] perfect
list. So it's like you are stitching
around your lists in order to get your
dream one list. And of course in Python
we have different ways on how to combine
your data. So now let's dive in. Okay,
so let's see how we can do that. In
order to combine things we need two
different lists. So the first one going
to be the letters and we're going to
have a
b and c. And let's have another one, a
list of numbers. So we're going to have
one, two, and three. Now the first and
easiest option is to put everything
together in one big list. So that means
we want to create one long list with
everything, all the items. Let's go and
create another variable. So the
combination and this can be very simple.
We could use the operator plus. It's
like you are adding numbers or combining
string values. So we're going to say
letters plus numbers.
So if you do that you are just combining
lists. So now let's see how it's going
to looks like. So, we're going to go and
print the combination. Let's go and
execute it. As you can see, we have a
list with everything all the items. Now,
of course, the order of the items
depends on how you are like combining
them. So, if you start with the numbers,
then you will get numbers at the start.
As you can see, it is simple. Now, just
quickly, since we are talking about the
operators, what you can do, you actually
can go and multiply a list. So, if you
say, let's go and copy the letters and
then multiply it with two. So, what can
happen in the output? You will get in
the output your list, but this time
you're going to get it twice. So, we are
not combining list here, we are just
multiplying it. Okay, moving on. Next,
now you might say, "You know what? Yes,
I want them to be combined, but at the
same time, I want them to stay in
separate groups." So, again, we are
talking about two lists inside one big
list. So, let's see how we can do that.
It is very simple. All what you have to
do is to create a new list. So, this
going to be the top level, the main
list, and inside it we're going to
specify the variable name and split them
with the comma. So, it's like you are
creating a list, but out of variables.
So, all what you are doing here is just
building a nested list. So, if you go
and execute it, look at this. Yes, we
have combined the two list in one big
list, but still the inner groups are
actually isolated. So, with that, you
are not mixing everything in one big
flat list. Okay, let's talk about
another scenario. Let's say that you
still want to have this one flat list,
but you don't want to combine the two
list in a third new list. Only what you
want to do is to change the list itself
by adding the second list inside it. And
for that, we have the method extend. It
going to go and stretch one list with
another list. Think about it like the
append. We always add something at the
end. So, the extend you can use it in
order to change one of the lists by
combining it from the other one. Okay,
so now we have our two lists. Now, we
have to decide which one you want to
change. Now I'm going to say let's go
and change the numbers. So we're going
to say the numbers should be extended
with the list from the letters. So now
let's go and print the results. So let's
first print the letters and then we're
going to go and print the numbers.
So let's see what can happen. As you can
see the first list will not be changed
at all because we didn't modify it. But
now look to the other list the numbers.
As you can see it is extended. It is
stretched. We have added to it the items
from the first list. So that we didn't
create a third a new list. We just
changed and extended one of the lists.
Okay, so now let's have another
scenario. Let's say that I don't want to
have like one flat list with all the
items and at the same time I don't want
to have everything isolated from each
others. So both of them are for me
really extreme. Now how about to go and
pair them up? So we take the first item
from the first list, put it together
with the first item of the second list.
And then we go and take the second item
from the first list together with the
second item of the second list. So if
you keep doing this you are pairing the
items from the two lists and for that we
use the function zip. Now there are like
few things that you have to pay
attention here. The output as you can
see the pairs are actually between
parentheses and this is what we call
tuples. It's as well a data structure.
So that means the output of the zip
going to be a list of tuples. So it is
something nested. And one more thing,
currently we have a perfect example a
perfect match where the length of both
of the list are equal. So let's say that
the first list is longer than the first
one. So we have four items there. So now
what going to happen is Python going to
go and create a tuple with only one
item. Well, no. Python going to stop at
the shortest list. So that means all the
extra letters and items will not be
paired and it to get left out. Sad,
right?
>> [screaming]
>> One last thing that you have to
understand about the output is that you
will not get it directly like this. The
output of the zip function actually
going to be an iterator, an object. So,
you will get in the output a weird
number, but don't worry about it. You
can always convert it to the list using
the function list. So, don't be scared
of the output. Okay, so let's try this
out. We have our two lists. And now I'm
going to go and create a new variable in
order to combine them and then we can
use the function zip. Now we're going to
go and specify the first list and then
we're going to say combine it with the
second list. So, actually that's it.
Let's try this out and print it. And if
you go and execute, you will get these
weird numbers, the special object zip,
and this is an iterator. We can learn
about it later, don't worry about it.
Now, I don't want to see this. I would
like to see a real list. In order to do
that, we're going to use the function
list to convert the data type. So, if
you do that, now we got our pairs. You
see the A with the one, the B with the
two, C with three. So, this is perfect.
Now, let's make one of the list bigger
than the other one by adding a fourth
item. So, we have here the number four.
If you go and execute it, sadly Python
will not be able to pair it. So, it's
going to stop at the shortest list. And
now quick cool thing that we can do is
that we can pair them with a string
value. So, if you say at the end for
example, let's go and add like hi and
then execute it. As you can see, Python
now is pairing everything together. So,
look at this. The first item from the
letters together with the first item of
the numbers together with the first
letter of the string. Don't forget
string is a sequence. And the next tuple
going to come from the second item from
the letter, the second item from the
numbers, and the second item from the
string. And now that's it. Python going
to stop because of the string. We have
here only two letters. So, that's why
Python going to stop at the shortest.
So, this is really nice and cool
function in order to pair things
together. Now, I would like to show you
one real example about the zip function
that I used last week. I had a list of
employee IDs. So, for example, 101, 102,
and 103. And I had another list where I
have the employee names. So, I have the
names like this. So, for example, Ali,
Sarah,
and John. So, that's what actually IDs.
And now, those two lists were actually
separated and I wanted to pair them
together. So, I would like to know which
employee ID belongs to which name. Now,
if I just want and say, "Do you know
what? IDs plus names." And then execute.
This really makes no sense because I
still don't have the relationship
between the IDs and the names. So, I
don't know which ID belongs to which
name. Instead of that, I used the zip
function. So, I used it here where I
paired the IDs with the names. And of
course, we have to convert it to a list.
Like this. So, let's go and execute it.
So, now look at the output. It looks way
nicer. Now, I have the relationship
between the ID and the names. All what I
have to do is to make sure the order of
the list is correct, of course. If it is
not matching, then I going to have the
wrong ID for the wrong person. So, this
is really nice. It's like you are
building relationship between two
different lists. And it has a lot of use
cases. All right, friends. So, with that
you have learned all the different ways
on how to combine your data. So, the
easiest and simplest way is to use the
operator plus in order to combine a
different list in a brand new complete
list. So, this is really straightforward
and easy. And another way we could use a
nested list. If you say, "You know what?
I don't want to put everything in one
list. Instead, I want just to combine
them, but they still should be separated
from each other." And for that, you have
to create a nested lists. And another
way you could use the method extends. If
you say, "You know what, I don't want to
create completely new list, this is
wasting of resources, I don't want to
create a new variable, I just want to
extend one of my list from another list.
So, it's like you are stretching one of
your list with the content of other one.
And another way you could use the
function zip, if you'd like to pair
elements by positions, like as we
learned the customer ID with the
customer names. So, I'm not mixing
everything together and I'm not creating
a nested list. [music] So, that you are
creating something called tuple in a
list. All right, so those are the
different ways on how to combine
multiple data structure in Python.
All right, my friends, so now so far I
can say we have covered the basics, like
creating, reading, analyzing, changing,
sorting, copying and even combining list
in Python. And that was actually only
the foundations. And of course, we don't
want to stop at the basics, we want to
push more to learn advanced techniques
on how to deal with the data structure
with the list. So, we have to learn how
to iterate through our list and we're
going to learn the concept of iterable
and iterator. We're going to learn how
to do a real data transformations, how
to filter our data. So, let's start with
the first topic, how we going to iterate
through our data, our lists.
All right, so [music] now so far we have
learned we can go and create like a
container of items, like a list and
behind the scenes Python going to go and
create an object with the type list. And
we could have of course other objects
like the tuple, set, dictionaries and
the primitive objects like the string,
integer, boolean and so on. Now, once
you build such a container, we have
learned how to deal with it, like how to
read, how to change it, how to order it.
So, everything is fine and we are happy.
So, where is the issue? Well, the thing
is everything, all the values, all the
items will be stored inside the memory.
And this, my friend, going to be a big
issue if you have a lot of data. That
means you're going to be taking a lot of
space in the memory. And actually, most
of the cases, we don't need all the data
that we have in the containers. We just
need like a subset or a few data. So,
now in Python, in order to overcome this
issue, we have another type of objects
called iterators. So, the iterator, on
the other hand, will not store
everything in the memory. So, it's not
like container or box. It's more like a
machine that going to produce values.
So, it's going to produce items one by
one as long as you are asking for it.
So, now the question is how we can work
with it. Each time we have to ask the
iterator for the next item, and the
iterator going to answer with the next
item and move to the next one. So, that
means we cannot jump around. We have to
keep pressing next until it's completely
empty. It's exactly like the same
iterator that you have in the for loop.
And now, of course, the question is how
we can create this type of object, the
iterator? Well, we have a lot of
functions in Python to create them, like
the enumerate, the zip, reversed, map,
chain, all those functions and stuff can
help us to create iterator objects. And
of course, you can change the type of
the object. So, if you have iterator,
you can make it any other type like a
normal list. So, now if you ask, why do
we need iterators? Well, mainly we have
three reasons. The first one, we need it
in order to build a loop. So, for a for
loop, we always need iterator to go
through all the items to repeat specific
block of code in order to do something.
The second reason is we use it in order
to save memory. So, if you have a lot of
data, you don't want to store everything
inside the memory, we use iterators.
They're going to stream the data one by
one, and this is gold for big data
streams. You don't want to put millions
of row in the memory, you just want to
process them one by one as they come in.
And the third reason is actually for
speed and flexibility. So, you can build
a real pipelines that's going to go and
transform the data on the fly without
having them to be stored somewhere. So,
iterators are amazing and modern and
they can help you in a lot of big data
use cases and as well they save you
memory. All right. Now, there are like
two words that you might hear a lot in
Python, iterable and iterator. They
might sound almost the same but they are
not. As we learned, an iterator it is an
object that can help us in order to do
the iteration. So, it is the process. It
is the engine, the machine that's going
to help us to do the iteration. But, in
the other hand, the iterable is the
thing that you can loop over. Like for
example, the list we call a list is
iterable because it has items and we can
loop through that. And as well the
string values, all of those stuff we
call it iterable because it is something
that we can loop over. But, if you have
an integer, even a big number or let's
say true and false, the boolean values,
they are not iterable. So, they don't
have like independent items that we can
go through. So, again, iterator is the
thing that's going to help us to iterate
and iterable is anything that has a
sequence of items. It's like a container
that we could use it in order to loop
over. All right. Now, enough theory.
Let's go and practice. Again, we have
our list of letters. Now, we want to
loop over the items and it is very
simple. So, we're going to say for L in
letters then double points. So, that
means I want to loop over our list and
then we're going to say simply for
example, let's go and print the item.
Now, if you go and execute it, so look
at this. Python iterated through all the
items of our list and printed it. So,
again, this is possible because the list
is iterable. So, that means I can loop
over our list. Of course, if you go and
make any like big numbers instead of it
and execute it, you will get an error
where Python going to say, well,
integers are objects that is not
iterable. So, you can do that only for
lists. Now, of course, you might say,
why do we need to do those stuff? Why I
have to loop over my list? Well,
actually, we use it in order to do some
transformations. Like, for example, I
don't want to have a lower-cased values.
I would like to have it as an upper
case. So, I'm going to go and transform
each string value using the methods
upper. So, if you do that and execute,
you will see now my items are actually
in upper case. So, we use it in order to
do some nice transformations. And now
you might say, okay, but I would like to
store this a new result in a list. Well,
for that, we going to go and create a
new list. At the start, it going to be
empty. And now, what we going to do,
each new value going to be appended to
this new list. So, what we going to do,
we going to go inside the loop and we
going to say, new list {dot} append. So,
I want to add something to my empty list
and I would like to go and add the
items. But, actually, I don't want to
add only the L. I would like it after it
gets transformed. So, we going to add
the upper. And now, what we can do, we
can go and print actually the new list.
So, let's try this out. Now, you can see
each step how our list is getting bigger
and bigger. So, at the first iteration,
we have only the first item, the A.
Then, we append to it the B and all of
them are upper case. And in the last
iteration, we appended the last item,
the C. So, now we have nice
understanding why we iterate, right? We
iterate through the original list, we do
some transformations, and maybe at the
end we store it in another list. So,
this is why we loop through a list.
Okay, moving on to the next tip, we have
an amazing built-in function in Python
called enumerate. It going to take any
iterable like a list or string value and
it going to give you back both of the
value and the index. Normally, as we
loop through the for loops, we always go
through the values. But, there are
scenarios where you need actually not
only the value, but as well its index.
So, if you use enumerate, it going to
return two things. The position number
of the item, the index. And by the way,
as a default, it start by zero, but you
could specify when it should start. So,
you could choose where it starts. And
the other thing that it going to return
is the value itself. So, let's try this
out. We're going to say enumerate, and
then we're going to pass to it our
iterable value. It's going to be our
list the letters. Of course, nothing
going to happen if you don't print. So,
let's go and do that. Now, as you can
see in the output, we are getting an
object enumerate. So, once you see those
weird numbers, that means this function
is actually returning iterator. So,
again, this function accept an iterable
like the list that we have here, and it
returns in the output an object iterator
that we could use in order to loop
through. Now, of course, if you want to
see the content of this iterator, what
you can do, you can convert the data
type to a list. So, now look at this.
Our list has now more information. We
have a number for each item, and this is
the index number. And if you say, "You
know what? I don't want to start from
zero. I would like to start from one."
So, you can say start, and now you
define your own number. If you go and
execute, now look at this. We start from
one this time, not from zero. So, this
is really nice, but the thing is we
don't use it like this. We use the
iterator in order to build a for loop.
So, we're going to say
for And now this time, since we have two
informations, two values, we have to
assign two variables for this loop. The
first one going to be the index, and the
other one going to be the value. So,
before we used to have only one variable
because we just loop through the values,
but now we have two informations, the
index and the value. And then the same
thing, we're going to use the operator
in, and then we're going to say
enumerate. And we're going to give it
the letters, and I'm going to stay with
the defaults where we start from zero.
So, now double points. And now the
question is what we're going to do with
it. Well, I'm just going to go and print
it. So I'm going to say print index and
then the value. So I'm printing both of
the variables. Let's go and execute it.
Now as you can see we have three
iterations because we have three items
and we don't have only the values, we
have as well the indexes. So that's why
we say enumerate is an iterator because
we can use it in our for loop in order
to iterate through the values. Now you
might say why do we need this actually?
Why do we need the index? Well, the
thing is if you have a long list with a
lot of values and let's say that you are
iterating and you found a bad value.
Like for example, let's go and remove
this value here. So we have now an empty
string which is not really good and for
the others we have a value. So if you go
and execute, you can see in the output
immediately okay, we have here an issue
and I know exactly where this issue is.
So it is at the position number one. So
I use it a lot if I'm analyzing my data
to find any issues and it going to help
to find exactly where this issue is in
my data. All right, moving on to the
next one. We've done this already. We
have the reverse. So if you use this
built-in function the reverse and you
pass to it an iterable like the letters
and then if you go and print it. By the
way, as you can see those functions that
could be used for the iteration has for
me like different color. So the theme
here showing like light blue. It's not
green like the print, right? Because
this one could be used for the
iteration. So now if you go and execute
it. Now look at this at the output we
have again those weird numbers and
stuff. That means this function is
returning an object iterator and I can
use it in my for loop. And of course if
you want to see the content of this, you
going to use the list. So we're going to
change the data type and now we can see
in the output our reversed list. Now
again we can go and use it in the for
loop. So reversed and then the letters
double points and we can print our items
L. So,
if you go and execute it, we going to
have three iterations, but it starts
from the end and ends with the start.
So, now finally we have now
understanding why the reverse gives us
those weird numbers because it is
actually an iterator that could be used
in our for loop. So, now moving on to
another function that we encountered
that as well gave us weird numbers. So,
let's go and make another list of
numbers 1 2 3. Now, remember the zip
function. So, we use it in order to pair
two lists. So, letters and numbers. And
as you can see the color of this
function is again the light blue. Again,
depends on the theme that you are using
in your Visual Code. So, if you go and
print it, you're going to get the weird
number, but if you go and change the
data type to a list, then you will see
the content. So, now we can see we have
combined the two list in one, but we
have paired all the values. Now, of
course, we can go and iterate through
those items like the one that we have in
the enumerates because here we have
pairs. So, in order to loop through two
items, you need two variables. So, for L
and N in zip letters and numbers. Let's
go and remove this over here. So, I'm
combining both of the lists and now I'm
going to go and iterate through them.
So, we're going to say print L and N.
So, the letter and the number. Now,
let's go and execute it. Now, look at
this. We are iterating at the same time
in two lists after using the zip
function. So, A comes from the first
list and one comes from the second list.
B is the second item from the first
list. Two is the second item from the
second list and so on. So, this function
is doing actually two things for us. It
is combining two lists and at the same
time it is returning a really nice
iterator that we could use in order to
iterate.
Okay, again we have a list of letters
and as you can see the values are
lowercase. Now, sometimes you want to go
and do some data transformations. Like
for example, I would like to go and
change the case from lowercase to
uppercase. Okay, so how we going to do
it? We need to apply this function for
each item. One solution could be like
let's go and build a for loop in order
to repeat the same task for each item,
but we have in Python way smarter
solution. We could use the help of the
function map where you give it two
things. The function that you want to
repeat for each item and as well the
iterable, which is the list of letters.
So now, if you pass those two things for
the function map, in the output you will
get your list but after transforming it.
Well, the output will not be immediately
a list, it going to be an object called
map. So it is like an iterator that you
could use it in your for loops. But of
course, you can change the data type to
a list anytime. It is very simple. The
map going to take your list and apply
the transformation that you define for
each item. All right, so we have a list
of lowercase letters and I would like to
make it an uppercase. Now, in order to
transform all the values, we going to go
and use the function map and here we
need two things. The transformation, how
we going to transform the data and as
well our data. So here the
transformation going to be like this.
I'm going to say go and use the method
upper. So in the class string, there is
a method called upper. You have to go
and use this method for the
transformation. Then after that, you
have to give it our data. So our data
going to be our letters. So now of
course, to see something in the output,
let's go and print it and execute. Look
at this, we have again these weird
numbers. So that means we have an
object, an iterator. In order to see the
data, you have to change the data type
list and then execute again. Now
perfect, look at this. We have the list
of letters but everything in uppercase.
So with that, I have transformed my data
in one very simple line. So, it is not
that hard. Let me give you another
example. Let's take like a list of
numbers. And the thing is my numbers are
actually in a string values.
Well, this is not really cool. I would
like to go and transform each of those
items to a number. So, we have to go and
change the data type. And for that, we
could go and use the map function. So,
now what is the function? All what you
have to do is to say int. So, I want to
see the data as a class integer. And
then, we're going to give it our data.
So, let's try this out. But of course,
we have to cast it as a list. And as
well, we have to print it. Now, let's go
and execute. So, now we have a list of
numbers and not anymore a list of string
values. So, as you can see in this
example, I didn't even use any method or
function. I just specified the class
type. And I said I would like to see the
numbers in the class type integer. But
if you need of course a specific
transformation like here the upper, then
you have to mention it in the function.
Let's have one more example. Let's say
that I have a list of names like for
example Mariam. And I'm going to go and
add few bad spaces left and right. The
next one could be John. And maybe at the
end we have space. And the last one
going to be Kumar where we have on the
left side a white space. Now, this looks
really bad. We have to clean up the data
by removing those unnecessary spaces.
So, for that, remember we have to use
the method strip. So, now again, in
order to transform our data structure,
we going to use map. So, here we have to
specify the method. It going to be the
strip. And of course, the question is
where do you find the strip? Well, the
same thing. We find this method inside
the class string. So, it is like the
upper. I'm telling here again, use the
strip methods that you can find inside
the string class. So, with that, Python
knows what to do. And And course, we
have to apply it on the data structure
names. Same thing and as well our
prints.
So, let's try this out. Perfect. Look at
this. We just cleaned up our data and we
don't have anymore those unwanted
spaces. So, now one last thing. Let's
say that I would like to use the map
function in the for loop. So, I don't
want to print it actually. I would like
to go and iterate through the values.
So, we don't need to cast it actually to
a list. All what you have to do is to
say for n in and then the map function
since the output is an iterator, we
could use it for the for loop and we can
say print and then an n. So, let me just
highlight it and execute. Now, look at
this. We have now again all our values,
but after we transformed it using the
method strip together with the function
map which gives us at the end an
iterator that we could use in order to
loop through. So, this is how we do data
transformation on the data structure
using the help of the map function.
Okay, so now [music] again we have our
list of letters and we are happy about
it. But now sometimes what might happen
that maybe our users start entering
stuff accidentally like maybe a number,
maybe a boolean values. Now, the thing
is I don't want that. I want only to
have in my data letters. Now, of course,
you might say okay, let's start reusing
the method remove in order to start
removing those unwanted characters, but
this is not really something that you
want to do because it is wasting time
each time you have to go and clean your
data. Instead, we can build like a
filter and we specify the rule on how to
filter the data. Like we say we going to
keep only alphabetical characters. So,
only letters. And for that we use the
amazing function the filter where it is
very similar to the map function. It
needs two things. The first thing is the
function and in this scenario we're
going to use the is alpha and the second
thing is the iterable which is our list
of letters. So, if you give it those two
for the filter function, in the output
you will get the same list but after
applying the filter function. And of
course, you will not get immediately
your list, you will get like an objects,
a filter objects, so that it is not
taking a lot of space in the memory. You
can use it in order maybe to iterate
using the loops. So, this is really
amazing in order to filter out any bad
data from your data structure. So, all
what you have to do is define your rule
and give it your data and in the output
you will get your clean data. Let's try
this out. Again, we have here our clean
nice data but with the time, let's say
that we are getting some weird data in
between, like for example, an empty list
or maybe we have a none, so there is no
real value. And at the end, we have a
boolean value like false. Now, those
informations, none, false, and empty
string, they are not true values. They
are just falsey values and I would like
to go and remove them by building a
filter on top of the list. So, in order
to do that, we're going to use the help
of the filter function. And now we have
to specify how to remove the data and
we're going to say, "You know what? Go
and remove the none." So, if you use the
none in the filter, you are telling
Python just go and remove the falsey
data, not only the none, but as well the
empty string and the false. It is a
little bit confusing, but this is how it
works. If you use the none in the filter
and then you pass to it the data, the
letters, then you will get only clean
data. Now, let's print it out. And of
course, in the output you will get the
objects, we don't need that.
I'm going to go and do the list in order
to change the data type to normal data.
Let's try this out. Now, look at this,
we have again our nice list of letters.
We don't have empty, none, false, so
that means we have cleaned up our data
from the falsey values using the none in
the filter. Now, there is another method
that you could use in the filter where
you're going to get the exact same
results. If you go and use instead of
none, you say pool. So, with that I'm
saying just keep in the list the true
values. So, the A, B, C, they are true.
The empty, none, and false, they are
false. So, if you go and execute it, you
will get the same results. You will get
your clean data. So, you could go with
the pool or the none. Okay, let's go
with another example. Let's say that we
have a list of stuff like string values
like the SQL, and we have here a number
inside a string. Then, we have Python,
and the last one going to be as well
string of numbers. Now, let's say that I
would like to make a rule that I accept
only letters. So, actually, other data
types like digits and numbers are not
allowed. It is very simple. In order to
do that, we can use the help of the
filters. So, we're going to use a method
inside the class string. It's exactly
like the map function. You define the
class and then the method name. So,
we're going to say is alpha. So, this is
our rule, and then we're going to give
our data. And in order to see the data,
what we're going to do, we're going to
have a list and print as usual. So,
let's check this out. Perfect. As you
can see, we built a filter to our list,
and what is left is only the items that
are alphabetical. So, we get rid of all
those numbers from the list. And of
course, my friend, we can build a for
loop on top of the output of this
function. So, for I in filter, I'm just
going to go and copy the whole thing,
and then double points, and we can say
print our I. So, let's go and try this
out. Now, look at this. We are iterating
through the output of the filter
function, and we are getting only the
alphabetical values so after the data
got filtered. So, as you can see, it is
really nice in order to filter bad data
from your data structure. All right, my
friend. So, with that you have learned
how to iterate through our data
structure, the list. What is the
difference between iterable and
iterator? Again, iterable is actually
the container, the data structure
itself, like the list, and iterator is
actually the process, the machine that
going to produce the next items. So,
with that you have learned how to do
data transformations in your data
structure by using the help of the
function map, and it is very smart and
simple. All what you have to give it is
actually two things, the data
transformation, the function that should
be applied on each item of your list,
and you have to give it your list, your
data. So, once you give it those two
things, it going to go and do the rest,
it going to do the magic by transforming
and changing all the items and data
inside your list. In order to filter
your data, you have I've only one
function called filter, and it is very
simple and similar to the map. It needs
only two things, the rule, the
expectation, and your data that should
be filtered. And we usually use it in
order to clean up the data inside a
list, or we want to focus only on
specific subset of the data that
fulfills a certain condition. So,
filtering data is something as well very
essential in any data project.
Okay, my friends. So, now we're going to
talk about another advanced concepts on
how to work with data structure, the
list in Python. We going to talk about
the lambda. The thing is, in Python
there are a lot of built-in functions
that we could use, but sometimes you
want to create your own custom logic,
and we can use lambda to do that. So,
now let's deep dive and understand this
technique. The lambda function is
actually a teeny function without a
name, and we also call it anonymous
function. So, instead of building a
whole function, we have like a short way
or shortcut. With one line, you can
define a whole function. And you will
see lambda is used a lot together with
the other data structure functions like
the map, filter, sort, in order to do
extra complicated logic on top of your
data structure like the list. So, how
actually lambda works? So, once you say
lambda, then you are like defining a
function. It has an input like for
example X, and then you define in the
function an expression, and it could be
anything like maybe you are doing some
calculations where you say X multiplied
to is two, or you are checking specific
thing like for example is the letter A
exist in this input in this X and any
other expressions. And of course at the
end you will get the result of this
expression. So actually that's it. You
need only two things that input variable
or variables and the expression. So what
can happen with the input? And that's
it. Okay, so let's try this out. All
what you have to do is to use the
keyword lambda like this and after that
you define any variable name for the
input. So for example I need only one
variable so X and after word double
points in order to define now the
expression. So what can happen with the
X? We going to go and multiply it with
two. It is very simple. Now the question
is how to use this? In order to do that
you have to define at the start for
example a variable like for example
multiply and then you say equal to the
lambda. So that means actually the
variable multiply is holding like a
formula. We don't know yet exactly what
is the value. So now in order to use it
let's go and print and we can say
multiply and now all what you have to do
is to specify a value. So you are
treating now the multiply as like any
other function like the print. You
define the function name the multiply
and then you pass for it a value. So
here since we said okay we need an X so
that means one item I can go and have a
number like two. So now if you go and
execute it now look at this we have
four. This is exactly the result of our
expression. So two multiply with two we
have four. Okay, so now let's take it to
the next level where we have actually
two inputs. So we have two variables. So
in order to do that it is very simple.
We start with the first input it can be
the X and then comma and the second
input. So now the rest is going to be
the same. We going to have a double
points and now we're going to tell
Python what can happen with the two
input. Well, we're going to say X plus
Y. So I'm just adding the two inputs. So
this is our formula. We're going to put
the whole thing in variable name like
ads. And then after that, we have to go
and use it. Now, we're going to use the
variable name and then we're going to
pass this time two values because we
have two inputs. So, we're going to say
one for the first value and two for the
second value. So, let's try this out.
Now, look at this. We are getting three.
So, 1 + 2 3. Mega easy, right? So, now
so far as you can see, we are using some
kind of like calculations on top of our
inputs. But now, what we can do, we can
make like a check in order to check the
inputs. So, we don't want to calculate
anything. We are just like analyzing and
checking. So, our expression will not be
manipulating the data. It will be just
checking. So, now for example, let's say
that I'm going to go and check whether a
character or a letter is part of another
string. So, for example, we can say
lambda. We are checking only one value.
So, it is only one parameter. So, the
input going to be only one character.
So, it's going to be only one input. We
could use any variable. So, it don't
have always to be an X. So, we're going
to say I double point. And then the
expression this time going to be a
normal check. So, we're going to say I
in and then let's have any like string
value for example, Python. So, I'm
checking whether the input is actually
character in our string. So, that's it.
Let's go and give it a name and then
we're going to print the variable name.
And now we have to pass any value like
for example, let's start with like an N.
So, is N actually a member of this
string value? Let's try this out. Well,
it is true. So, as you can see, we are
not changing the value. We are just
checking. Let's go and pick another
value like for example, Z. Is Z member
of the Python? Well, let's check out. As
you can see, we are getting false. So,
an expression could be anything.
All right. Now, with this you have the
basic understanding on how lambda works.
So, for example, if you look at the map
function, we said you need two things.
The first one is how to transform your
data, the function, and the second thing
going to be your data, like the list.
So, now we said we could use some
built-in functions and methods from
Python, like the upper, lower, or is
alpha, and those stuff. But, if you say,
"You know what? I need to do something
specific, so some extra complex logic."
We cannot go and use the built-in stuff.
We could go and use the help of the
lambda in order to specify what we want
to do. So, with the lambda, we're going
to define exactly how we're going to
transform our data structure, our list.
Okay, so now let's practice. I'm going
to show you an example that I had in my
projects. So, I had a list of prices,
but the issue is that the prices were in
string values. And as well, each price
has a dollar sign at the start. So, we
have 12.50,
maybe another price like, as well with a
dollar sign, 9.99, and the last one, as
well with a dollar sign, 100.0.
Now, the thing is with those values, you
cannot do a lot of aggregations
and calculations like the average, mean,
max. You have to convert it from a
string to a float. So, that means I have
to transform my list from list of
strings to a list of floats. But, the
challenge is that you cannot go
immediately from a string to a float
because of those string values. So, that
means first you have to do some
manipulations to remove it, and then
change the data type to a float. Now,
I'm going to show you how I usually do
it. I don't jump immediately and start
writing lambda and stuff. I try to build
that transformation like with one value.
And if it works, then I go to the
lambda. So, for example, I'm going to
say, "Let's have a variable called P."
And I'm going to give it the first
value, 12.50. So, now I'm going to start
like playing with this value. So, the
first thing is that I'm going to go and
get rid of the dollar sign. So, how to
remove a dollar sign from a string
value? Think about it. Which string
methods we have to use? Well, we can go
and use the replace. And what we're
going to do? We're going to replace the
dollar sign with actually nothing, an
empty string. So, let's go and try this
out. Perfect. Now, I don't have the
dollar sign, but still my value is
actually a string value. The next step
of the transformation, I'm going to go
and change the data type. So, it's going
to be very simple, floats, and then the
result of the replace going to be the
input for the floats, and with that
we'll be changing the data type. So,
look at this, we have 12.5, and of
course, if you want to be very sure, we
can go and check the type.
So, as you can see, now we have a float,
and this is exactly what I need in order
to do some aggregations. So, I have
actually the formula, and now I have to
put it in a lambda. Now, the input going
to be only one price, so for example, P
double point. Now, what we're going to
do with the prices is actually this
whole transformation. I'm going to just
go and copy and paste over here. So, now
I know the input, I know what going to
happen with my input. Now, the next step
is to go and apply the whole thing on
our list. So, in order to do the
transformations, we're going to use the
map function, and then we're going to
pass for it our list, it is the prices.
Let me just get rid of this, and of
course, the output of this going to be
an iterator, that's why you have to go
and change the data type to a list in
order to see the values. And the last
thing, of course, I would like to see
the output. So, let's try this out. Now,
look at this, I have a list of floats,
and this is exactly was my data
transformation that I wanted to do. I
changed some weird string values to a
float. So, again, step by step, always
think about how to do the
transformation, then put it in a lambda,
and then use a map function in order to
apply the whole thing to your data. It
is not that hard, right? Just do it step
by step like this, and you can do
amazing custom transformations on top of
your data structures.
Now, the same thing for the [music]
filtering, we need two things, the rule
on how to filter the data, and the data
itself. Now, about the rule, the
function, we could use the built-in
methods and functions, but if you want
some custom specific filters, we can use
the help of the lambda again. So, that
means with the help of the lambda, we
going to specify exactly how to filter
our data in the list. Okay, so let's try
this out. We going to have a simple
example where we have a list of prices.
Let's say I have 120, 30, maybe 300, and
80. Now, my goal is I just want to see
the high prices in my list. So,
everything equal or higher than 100
should stay in the list. All other
prices that is lower than that, I don't
want to see it in the list. So, that
means we have to build a filter and for
that we need some custom logic. Now, the
first step is to think about how you
going to write the condition, the logic
for the filter. And it could be very
simple. The price going to be higher or
equal to 100. So, this is the logic.
Now, in order to use it for this data
structure, we have to go and use the
help of the lambda. So, we're going to
say lambda and we going to pass for it,
of course, one price. Now, the question
is what we going to do with this price?
Well, actually we going to check whether
it is equal or higher than 100. Okay, so
we have the logic. The next step is that
we're going to use the filter function.
So, we're going to say filter and this
is the filter logic and we have to pass
for it our data. So, what should be
filtered? It's going to be the list of
prices. Now, of course, to see the
results we have to change the data type
and I would like to print the results.
So, let's see what will happen. Look at
this. We have a list with only high
prices. Everything that is higher or
equal to 100. So, very easy, right? We
use the lambda in order to define the
custom filter logic. Then we go and use
it in the filter function together with
our data. So, it is easy. This time
we're going to go and use a nested list.
So, we're going to have a list of
students with their scores. So, let's
say in the first list we have the name
and as well the score. And let's have
another student. Let's say
Omar, and we have 90. And the last one,
Max, and we have 60. So, three students
with three scores. So, now let's say
that I would like to have a list where
the students has a score higher than 70.
So, anything below that should not be
part of my list. Now, of course, this is
very specific. You don't have a function
for that or a method. You have to build
your own custom filter. Let's see how we
can do that. So, the first thing is that
we have to go and select exactly what we
are checking, right? So, it's going to
be the students. And let's go for the
row number zero, for example. Now, what
do we want to check is actually the
scores, right? So, it is the index
number one. So, now this score should be
higher than 70, right? Now, we can go
and test it, of course. So, we can say
print, and then execute it. You can see
it is true. So, the first student is
actually matching our rule. Let's go for
the second students. It is true. The
third student. So, with that, actually,
we have our filter rule. Now, the next
step we're going to go and put it in a
lambda. Now, let's do that. We're going
to say lambda. Now, here it is
interesting. What is the input for this
function? It's going to be the whole
row. So, it's going to be a row. So, I'm
going to send Maria and as well the
value. And now, what we're going to
check in this row is actually the index
number one, right? It is the second
value. So, we're going to say row and
one. Again, I'm sending to the function
the row, and I'm checking the second
value of the row. If it is higher than
70, then everything is okay. So, this is
always how we're going to do it in the
nested lists. You send the row to
lambda, and then you tell Python what to
do with this row. Now, the next step is
that we're going to put everything in a
filter, since we are building a filter.
So, filter, this is our rule, and then
of course, we're going to send it our
data. So, the students. And now, of
course, in order to see the results, we
have to convert the objects to a list
and as well, of course, to print. So,
now let's try this out. Now, look at
this at the output. We have Maria with a
score 85 and Kumar with a 90, but we
don't have Max with 60. So, actually,
our filtering is working. So, as you can
see with that, you have built a custom
logic using the lambda and we used it
together with the filter in order to
filter our nested list. Now, another
application for the lambda, we have the
method sort in order to sort your list.
So, if you use the default, going to
sort it from the lowest to the highest
or if you say, you know what, let's sort
it from the highest to the lowest using
the reverse equal to true. But now, how
about to define our custom way on how to
order our list? And again, we could use
the help of the lambda in order to
exactly explain for Python how to sort
the list. Okay, so now, another
challenge maybe to you if you want to
pause the video. Now, I would like to
keep only the students where the first
character of their names start with M.
So, that means by looking to the data, I
expect you to have only two students in
the outputs, Maria and Max cuz both of
them starts with M. So, pause the video,
otherwise, I'm going to show you how it
works. Now again, I start just with the
logic. So, let's get an index students
like for example, the second one. Now,
what we are interested is with the first
information, with the first name. So,
it's going to be the index zero. And
now, in order to check the first
character of any string, we're going to
use the method starts with and then
we're going to tell Python what we are
looking for. So, we are checking whether
the value starts with M and actually,
that's it. So, let's go and print it out
and execute. So, as you can see, for
Max, it is working. Let's go for Kumar
and try this out. We are getting false.
So, actually, my logic is ready and I'm
going to put it in lambda. So, lambda,
as usual, we're going to pass the whole
row, double points, and then we have to
specify which value in the row? Well, it
going to be the first value, the first
name. So, the index number zero. And
then we're going to say starts
with
M. So, I have the whole logic. The next
step I'm going to go and put it in the
filter in order to filter my data.
Students and same thing list and the
last one print. Now, I'm just going to
go and comment this out. So, let's try
this. Look at this. We have now the
students where the first name begins
with M. So, as you can see, it is not
that hard, right? Do it step by step.
The first one is to define the filter
logic using lambda. And after that, go
use the function filter together with
your data in order to filter your list.
And that's it. All right, my friends.
So, that's all about the lambda. It is
an amazing technique in order to create
your custom logic in very short and easy
way. And it going to be great assistance
to use it together with other functions
and methods like the map, filter, and
the method sorts. So, this opens the
door for many flexibility in order to
define your logic.
All right, my friends. Now, we have
reached the final advanced technique,
the last advanced tool that we have in
the toolbox in order to work with the
data structure in Python. And to be
honest, this one is the coolest feature
in Python. We have the list
comprehensions. So, what is this? Now,
we have learned in the advanced topics
that we can iterate through the data. We
can do data transformations and
manipulations. We can filter our data.
But now, how about to put them all
together in one simple line? Sounds like
a perfect plan, right? So, now let's
deep dive into the list comprehensions.
Okay, so now let's say that we have the
following three prices. And I would like
to, let's say, multiply the prices, but
only for the high prices, only if the
price is higher than 50. So, the 80
going to be 160, the 20 it will not pass
the test, that's why it will not appear
in the results. And the 100, it going to
be 200. So, we are filtering and
transforming the data. Now, in order to
build this in Python, we could use the
way of comprehension. Well, we don't
have a keyword like method or function
for that, you have to build three blocks
in one line. The first block it going to
be your data transformation, so it going
to be your exp ression, the price
multiplied by two, and then the next
block it going to be the loop itself.
It's going to be a very simple for loop
in order to go and iterate through the
items of your list. And now, in the
third and last block, you will define
how to filter your data. And for that,
we're going to use the if statement with
a condition, price is higher than 50.
Now, what going to happen behind the
scenes if you execute this one line of
code? The first thing, Python going to
go and create the iterator out of your
list, and after that, it's going to
build a classical for loop, where it's
going to go through all the items one by
one. And once there are no more items to
process, it's going to go and jump to
the end. Now, what is interesting, what
going to happen inside the loop? Well,
Python first going to go and filter your
data. So, we're going to have first the
if condition, it's going to check
whether the price is higher than 50, and
only if this true, Python going to go
and do your data transformation. So, the
expression going to be price multiplied
by two, and then go back to the start of
the loop. And now, here it is
interesting, if it is not fulfilling the
condition, it is false, this time it's
going to skip everything and go back to
the top of the loop. So, that means, if
your item is not fulfilling the
condition, it will not be transformed,
and as well, it will not be appended in
the new list. So, it will not appear at
all in the final results. So, now, let's
go through it quickly with this example.
Python going to go and grab the first
value, the 80, then first, it's going to
try to filter it. But since it is
fulfilling the condition, 80 is higher
than 50, right? It's going to go and
implement your expression, so it's going
to multiply it by two and append it to
the new list. Then go back to the top of
the loop and grab the next item. It's
going to be the 20. Now 20 going to go
to the test and this time it going to
fail it because 20 is not higher than
50. This time we're going to go to the
false and it going to skip everything
and go back to the top. So for the 20,
we will not have anything for it in the
output. Now the last one we have the
100. It is passing the test. Python
going to go and multiply it with the two
and then it going to go and append it to
our new list, of course, at the end and
then go back to the top of the list.
Well, we don't have any more items to
process. It's going to go and exit the
loop and then return the new list. So
this is how the comprehension works and
Python going to execute it like this.
First it's going to loop through your
items, try to filter your data and then
if it pass the filter, it will run your
expression to modify your data. And one
last thing that you have to understand,
filtering the data is optional. So that
means actually you can skip it. If you
do that, Python has to iterate through
all the items and apply the expression
for all the items. So filtering the data
is totally optional.
Okay, so now let's practice. I'm going
to show you an example that I have as
well in the project. So I had like a
list of domains. The URLs for the
domains could come in different formats.
So for example, you could have like
www.google.com
and maybe another one, for example,
i.com and a third one it's going to be
like localhost, so you don't have .com
or anything. And last one, let's make it
uppercase datawithbara.com.
Now you can see the data is not really
clear. We have different formats,
different cases and as well we don't
have like a domain here in the
localhost. So I would like to normalize
and transform the data to standard
formats and at the same time removing
things that are not actually domain. So
that means I have to do at the same time
transformation and filtering. And for
that we're going to use that
comprehension. First, we start with a
new list. So, let's call it cleans.
So, now here we have to add the three
blocks. The first one is data
transformation.
The second going to be the for loop.
And the third going to be data
filtering.
Now, usually I start with the for loop.
Of course, you can put everything in one
line, by the way. Now, for the for loop,
it's going to be very simple. For D in
domains, that's it. Without double
points, by the way. So, with that, I
have the iteration and the loop. The
next step, I start working on the data
transformation. So, now what we're going
to do in the data transformation, we're
going to clean up the data. The first
thing that is really annoying is the
lower and upper case. So, I'm going to
say I want to skip the upper case. I'm
going to make everything lower case. So,
for each domain, apply the method lower.
So, this is the first thing. After we
made everything lower, we can go and get
rid of the first part, www. because it
is unnecessary for domains. So, I'm
going to say replace, remove for me the
first part, and replace it with nothing.
So, this is how you remove. Now, I'm
going to say if you do that, you're
going to clean up the data, and I think
the best example here is the openai.com.
It is lower case, and as well without
the first part. So, with that, you have
covered the two blocks. And now we come
to the data filtering. Of course, this
is optional. But now, I need it in order
to remove the local host. So, it is
actually very simple. We're going to
start with an if. So, what is the
condition? Well, actually, the domain
should contain a dot. If you don't have
dot, then this is not valid. So, if dot
in D,
if that's true, then do the
transformation. Well, actually, that's
it. So, as you can see, between the
blocks, there will be no commas. There
will be no double points, or whatever.
Of course, if you want to put everything
in one line, you can do that. So, if I
go and do this, then after that, the
for, I just have to separate using
space. Then, of course, it's going to
work. But to be honest, I like it like
this because it is easier to read,
right? Now, the last tip, of course, we
have to go and print our new list. So,
now let's go and try this out. Well, I
have an issue. I think I have here one
extra W, right? So, let me just try it
again. Now, look at those domains. They
look really nice. So, we don't have the
Ws at the start, and everything is
lowercased. So, everything is clean and
normalized, and we don't have as well
our bad data, the localhost. So, look at
this how Python is amazing and very
compacted. We have done many things in
one statement. So, we created a new
list, we iterated through the items, we
have done cleanup and data
transformations, and we have built a
filter on the data in just one line, or
let's say here three lines. So, this is
amazing. Now, let me just show you it
quickly. If you go and remove the filter
and execute, it's going to work. You
will not get any syntax error, but with
that you are getting, of course, the bad
data in the output. And by the way,
there is one more thing that I'm going
to show you with that. I can get back my
filter, but let's say that I just want
to filter the data, but I don't want to
change actually the values. So, I don't
want to do any transformations, but if
you go and like remove it and execute,
you will get an error, of course. You
have to have a first part, but now
instead of writing a whole expression, I
just go and add the item. So, only the
D. If you do that, then Python going to
accept it, and with that you are saying,
"Okay, append the D, but don't do any
transformations on it." And this setup
here, we are just filtering the data and
creating new list. Let's try this out.
Now, look at this. We have only three
items, so we don't have the localhost,
but we have the exact same values like
before without any normalizations. So,
this is as well one way in order only to
filter the data without doing any
manipulations if you want the same
values as before. And of course, I think
in this scenario I I go and put
everything in one line because it is
very quick and short. So, if you go and
execute it, it will work. So, again, you
can do transformation and filtering or
only transformation without filtering.
And the last scenario like here, only
filtering the data. So, once you
understand the three blocks, it going to
be easy to understand what is going on
here. Because to be honest, at the
start, as I saw the comprehensive list,
it was not really clear for me what is
going on. So, D for D in domain, it was
a little bit hard for me, but as I
understood the block and how things work
behind the scenes, everything clicked
and I understood how this works. All
right, my friends. So, let's recap. The
list comprehensions is the coolest thing
in Python. You combine actually three
things. We go and loop through the list,
then we do data filtering, and the last
thing we do data transformation. And
everything is actually in one line. So,
this is very powerful for data analysis
and data engineering, and this is the
most elegant feature that I know about
data in Python.
The first thing we can do is how to
access a list, and you can go and pick
directly one by using parentheses and
specifying the position number. So, we
call this indexing. You are getting
exactly one item. But if you want to get
multiple items, we have to use something
called slicing. So, if you specify the
start and the end, you can cut exactly
how much you need. And another thing
that we can do to our list is to unpack
it. That means we going to split all the
items into multiple values. So, in one
line, in one go, you are assigning
multiple variables to the values of your
list. And in Python, we have a lot of
built-in functions that can help us to
explore and analyze the data. Like for
example, if you want to find the highest
value in a list, then you can use max.
Or you can do the opposite where you are
searching for the lowest value using the
function min. And another one, if you
want to find out how many items do we
have inside the list and for that we use
the function length or we can check our
list by finding out whether there are
any missing values by using the function
all. All values must be true in order to
get a true and the opposite where it is
more relaxed, we have the any. It going
to check if at least one true in our
list. And as well, we have other methods
that's going to help us to analyze our
list like the count. It going to tell us
how many times an item appears in our
list. Another called index in order to
find out where exactly we can find our
item, the position number. And as well,
we could use operators in order to
analyze our list using the in operator.
So, we are asking is this item member of
our list or not. And we can as well
change our list like for example, we can
use the method append in order to add an
item to the end of our list or you could
use the method insert in order to put
them exactly where you want by
specifying the index. And now, if you
want to remove all the items, you want
to hit the reset button. You can use the
method clear in order to remove
everything. But now, if you want to
remove only one thing, you can use the
method remove. So, here we can remove by
specific value or you can go and use the
method pop in order to remove by
position number. By default, it going to
remove the last item. But of course, you
can specify exactly which position
should be removed. Now, if your list is
chaotic and messy, we can sort it like
using the method sort if you want to
sort everything alphabetically or
numerically from lowest to the highest
or you can use the method reverse if you
want to flip the list around. So, the
first item going to be the last one and
the last item going to be the first one.
Now, we come to something confusing
where you want to create a copy. The
first option we can use assignments. If
you want to point two different
variables to the same list. So, any
change going to affect directly both of
your variables. But if you want to have
like a real copy, then you can use the
method copy, so that you're going to end
up having two variables pointing to two
different lists. This is more safe,
especially if you have like very simple
list. But, if you have nested lists,
this will not work because this going to
create a shallow copy. So, only the
first level is separated, but all the
children's are shared. That's why we
have another method called deep copy,
where everything, all the levels going
to be isolated in real copy. Okay,
moving on. In real words, usually we
have a lot of lists, and we would like
to merge them all in one list. So, you
could use the plus operator in order to
combine two lists, and you generate
brand new list in the outputs. This is
really nice if you want to keep the
originals, but if you don't want a new
list, you would like to extend one of
them, we have methods called extends.
So, it's going to go and stretch and add
one list with the items of another list.
So, the only difference here is one
create something new, and the other just
expand what is there. Now, next thing's
going to get more advanced. For example,
we have a function called zip. It's like
a zipper. It's going to go and connect
items from multiple lists into pairs.
So, the first item with the first item,
the second with the second, and so on.
And another nice function we have
enumerator. It's going to go and
automatically adds an index number for
each item of your list. So, it's pairing
the values with their index. Now, we
come to something serious and very
powerful in real projects. We have a
function called map. It's going to go
and apply a function, a data
transformation, for every single item
inside our list. Like, for example,
changing all the letters to a lower case
or to an upper case, or doing some
casting. So, we are applying a data
transformation for all the items. And
another function, which is very similar,
called filter. You're going to define
your condition, your rules, and Python
going to keep only the items that
fulfilling your condition. And anything
that is not meeting the requirements, it
going to be filtered out. And now we
come to the last one, the most elegant
solution from Python. You can combine
data filtering and data transformation
into one line. So, that means we're
going to use two rules. You're going to
define the filtering and then you're
going to do the data transformation. So,
it's like both filter and map function
in one. So, that's it. Those are the 30
things, functions, method, operators
that you can use in Python data
structure lists. And I think you can go
and print this cheat sheet and each time
you are dealing with data structure, you
can use it.
Hey friends. So, now everything so far
that you have learned, all the methods,
the functions, the operators, they were
applied only on one type of data
structure, the list. But the thing is,
in Python we have three more. We have
the tuple, set, [music] and dictionary.
So, in total we have four types of data
structures. That's why we have to go and
learn them all, understand the
differences between them, so that at the
end you know how to choose the right
type for the right scenario. Now, the
first thing that I want you to
understand is that each data type
structure behaves differently in Python.
Each one has its own personality and
usually we categorize them into four
main characteristics. So, we have
ordered, allow duplicates, indexed, and
mutable. So, now let's understand those
four types for the first data structure,
the list. Let's go. Okay, so let's make
very simple list of numbers. We're going
to have 10, 30, and 20. Now, the first
characteristic is ordered. So, that
means Python going to remember the exact
position of every value in your list. In
other words, nothing going to change
unless you change the order. So, that
means if I go and just print our list
and execute, you can see the first item
is the 10, the second 30, and 20,
exactly like I defined it. So, Python
didn't change the order of my data. It
kept it exactly like I defined it. So,
for example, if we put that 20 as a
second item and the 30 at the last and
execute, you can see Python is following
my orders. That's why we call the list
is ordered. So, we're going to say here
ordered. All right. Then, second one,
it's all about duplicates. And in
Python, lists allow duplicates. So, that
means you can store the same value more
than once. And Python going to keep it.
So, it will not remove it. So, for
example, we have here 10. If I go at the
end and add another value 10, it is
totally fine. So, if you go and execute
it, you see in the output we have the 10
twice. That means it allow duplicates.
Now, moving on to the third
characteristic, we say lists are
indexed. So, what this means, we can
access the values of any list directly
using their position number, their index
number. And by default, we always start
with the zero. So, for example, if I
would like to go and access the second
value, the 30, it is very simple as we
learned before. We going to use the
variable name and then we specify the
index number. It going to be the one.
So, now if I execute it, you can see I'm
accessing the value 30. That's why we
say it is indexed. I can go and access
any value of my list using the index or
position number. So far, everything is
easy, right? Now, to the last one and to
the most important characteristic, the
lists are mutable. That means after I
create a list, I can go and change it
like adding, removing, updating,
rearranging the values. I can do
whatever I want. So, for example, I
would like to go and update the last
value over here. We can say my list and
it's going to be the position number
three. And let's go and assign it for
the value 40. So, that I'm updating my
list. So, let's print it out and check.
So, as you can see in the output, the
last item now is 40. That means the list
is mutable. So, you are mutable. So, my
friends, this is what we mean with the
four characteristics and with the list
as you understood, it is ordered, it is
allowed duplicates, it is indexed, and
changes are allowed, so it is mutable.
So, if you are using list, everything is
allowed and that's why lists are simple,
flexible, and used almost everywhere. It
is my default option. Enough with the
list. Now, we're going to deep dive into
the second data type structure, that
doubles. Let's go.
All right. Now, my friends, if you are
using a list in real projects, you're
going to find out sometimes it is really
risky. Like for example, if you are
storing the database information, the
database server, the port, the username.
Now, if you use a list, what can happen?
You're going to be a little bit scared
that anything inside your code might
change those values. There is no
guarantee. Maybe you or someone else
that did something and changed the data.
And if this happens, you're going to
lose that connection to the database and
everything going to fail. So, for this
scenario, we don't go and use a list.
Instead, we use a double. So, what is a
double? A double is an ordered
collection that cannot change after
creation. So, it is very similar to the
list, but with one big difference. It is
locked. It is frozen for safety reasons.
Once you create it, Python will not
allow you or anyone else to change it.
So, it is exactly perfect for this
scenario. And the syntax for this is
going to be very simple. We are going to
use as well special characters. But this
time we're going to use the parentheses
and as usual, you separate your values
using a comma. So, now as we have done
with the list, we're going to check now
the four characteristics of the doubles.
Let's go. Okay, so let's go and create a
very simple double using numbers. So,
again, 10, 30, and 20. Now, the first
thing that we're going to check whether
the double is ordered. So, let's go and
just print our double. Now, if you do
that, you can see it is ordered. So, as
you can see, we have 10, 30, 20, exactly
how I defined it. So, Python going to
keep the order as I defined the tuple,
and we say it is ordered. Now, let's go
and check whether it allow duplicates.
So, I have here 10. I'm going to go and
add another 10, and then execute. As
well, like the list, it allow
duplicates. So, I can have the same
value more than once, and Python will
not drop it. Now, the next thing,
whether it is indexed. So, again, I
would like to access the second item,
the 30. Let's try this out. So, my
tuple, and the index number going to be
one. So, let's try this out. Again, the
same as list, I can access any value
using an index number. So, we say a
tuple is indexed. So far, everything
exactly like the list. Now, to the
fourth characteristic, can we change
something after creating it? So, is it
mutable? So, again, for example, let's
go and update the last value. So, the
three, two, something like 40. Now,
let's go and execute it. Well, you're
going to get an error because a tuple is
immutable. It is totally frozen, and
Python will not allow you to change
anything in the tuple after the
creation. I can read it, I can access
it, but I cannot go and modify it. So,
you cannot add anything, you cannot
remove or update. So, if you go and try
any method that we learned with a list,
like for example, the remove, as you can
see, it is white because we don't have
such a method for that tuple, so it will
not work. Or a pop,
adds, all those stuff are not allowed.
And that's why we say a tuple is
immutable. You cannot change it. And
now, you might say, "You know what?
Okay, we don't have a method for the
tuple, but I can go and use the
functions. Like for example, the sorted.
It's going to go and sort the data like
in the list." So, let's try this out to
sort a tuple. And of course, we're going
to go and print it. So, let's try this
out, and we add this comment here. So,
let's go and execute. You can see the
data is sorted. So, we were able to
change the data. So, we have 10 10 20
30. It's ascending. So, it is immutable.
I can change it. But, my friend, this is
a list. This is not anymore a tuple. So,
the output of this function going to
always be a list. You can pass for it,
yes, a tuple, but in the output, you
going to get a list. So, you cannot
really change anything with a tuple,
even sorting the data differently using
a function. So, this is how the tuple
behaves in Python. It is very similar to
the list. It is ordered, allow
duplicates, it is indexed. But, the only
big difference here, it is locked,
frozen. So, you cannot change anything
after you create it. So, tuple is
immutable. And for the use case, you
going to use it each time you have the
feeling that data must be protected. If
I use a list, it's going to be a bigger
risk. That's why in this scenario, you
don't use a list, and you protect your
data using a tuple.
All right, friends. Now, we're going to
talk about the third type of data
structures. We have the sets. So, now,
what is the issue? Let's say that you
have a list of customers ID. And as you
are checking the data, you have found
out that some IDs are appearing twice.
Those duplicates in my list is indicator
that the data is not clean. So, now,
what we can do? We can start like
removing the duplicates and cleaning the
data by building a loop and then start
removing duplicates. And after a while,
we have to recheck again and maybe start
removing again. So, this is not really
nice. We don't do that in Python. If you
have this issue where you want to keep
the data unique, then we don't use list.
Instead, we use the data structure
called sets. So, what is a set? It is
unordered collection of unique items.
So, here again, we have two things. It
is unordered, and at the same time, it
is unique. And in order to create a set,
the syntax for that going to be very
simple. Again, we're going to use those
special characters. So, we're going to
use the curly brackets, and as usual,
the data inside it going to be separated
with a comma. So now, let's go and
understand the behavior of the sets in
Python because, as we understood, every
data structure has its own personality
and rules. So, let's go. Okay, so let's
go and create a set on this time the
curly brackets with same data. So, 10,
30, and 20. So now, the first thing that
we're going to check whether the set is
ordered. So, print my set, and let's go
and execute. Now, look at this. We have
10, then 20 and 30. But I defined it
like this, 10, 30, and then 20. So,
Python did change the order that I have
defined. That means, my friends, the set
is unordered. It is not like the list or
the tuple. But now, you might say it
looks nice. Python is like sorting the
data ascending. Well, this is totally
coincidence because this is totally
random. Let me show you exactly how this
works. As we create a list in Python,
it's going to be stored in like an
array. So, each item is sitting next to
each other in the memory, and each one
of them has the index number. So, Python
can go and access any value using the
index number. And with that as well, it
maintains the same order. But as you
create a set, Python going to store it
completely differently. So, we have like
a hash function that is generating
cryptical values, and each item going to
be placed based on this hashed value,
and not by the position number, not by
the index. So now, look at this. After
Python create the set, it has no chance
at all to understand the order of the
items. So, it doesn't know which was the
first, the second, the last. And once
you print it, it's going to be depending
on those hash values to print it in the
output. So, that's why the sets are
unordered. And now, you might say, "But
this looks chaotic. Why do we have those
hash values?" Well, the only reason for
that is speed. So, that means with the
set, Python can check if a value exist
very fast using those hash values. So,
there's like a trade-off between losing
the order and having fast performance
for your lookups. Now, let's check the
second thing. Remember, does it allow
any duplicates? So, I'm going to have
the 10 twice. Let's go and execute it.
Look at this. I have the 10 only once.
So, this is another restriction with the
set. It doesn't allow duplicates, but
you will not get any error in the output
if you have duplicates. Python just
going to go and remove it, which is
sometimes very nice thing if you want to
keep unique list of data. Like as a
start, as I said, the customer IDs, I
would like to have it unique. I don't
want to deal with duplicates. Now, let's
keep moving. How about accessing
specific value? Is it indexed? So, can I
access the second value, the 30?
Remember, as we've done with the list
and the tuple, we go and tell Python the
index number going to be the one. So,
let's try and print it. Let's go and
execute. Now, look at this. It is not
indexed. And this is, of course, will
not work because look at this again.
With the list, you have for each value
the index number, but with the sets, we
don't have those numbers anymore. So, we
don't have anymore the possibility to
access any individual item inside my
set. And of course, we cannot go and use
those hash numbers because it is
something internally for Python. It is
not for us to access specific value. So,
that's why, my friends, we say a set is
not indexed. Okay, so no order, no
duplicates, no index. How about the last
one? Can I change anything after
creating my set? So, let's try
something. I cannot go and update
because I don't have an index. Let's go
and remove by value. My set.remove.
So, I have a color, which is really
nice. Now, I'm going to go and remove,
for example, the 20. And after that, I'm
going to go and print my set. And then
execute. Finally, something is allowed.
That means it is mutable. So, this is
how the set behaves. It is unordered. It
is unique. Doesn't allow any duplicates.
It is not indexed. We don't have the
position number anymore. We have those
hash values, but it is immutable, so we
can go and change it after we create our
sets. Okay, friends, so since sets have
their own personality, they have as well
their own methods. So now we're going to
go and explore new methods and operators
that we didn't use with the lists. So,
let's go. [music]
Okay, so now let's go and create a very
simple sets. So we're going to have 10,
20, 30, and 40. Now the first question
is how to add an item to our sets. Now
we cannot go and use appends or inserts
because it is based on the position
number of the item, and we don't have
those stuffs. That's why we have a new
method called adds. Very simple, and
you're going to go and add for it the
value. So it's going to go and insert
the item but only if it is not already
there because we cannot have duplicates.
So, let's try this out and let's print
it. Now look at this, we have 50
somewhere here in the middle. So it will
not append it, right? Totally random. Of
course, if you go and add 10 and
execute, well, nothing going to happen
because we have it already here. We will
not get an error, but Python going to go
and ignore it. So, you can go and add
only new values. Okay, so now this going
to be annoying of course if you want to
add multiple values to my set. So for
each new value I'm going to go and add a
new line. So for that we have a very
nice method called updates. And now you
can pass for it any iterable. So
anything that has a sequence. It could
be a set, a list, and even a string.
Like for example, let's go and add hi.
So if I go and update it, you can see
both of the characters, the H and I, is
inside my set. And you can go and use a
list like one, two. So if you go and
execute it, you can do that. And as well
it's going to accept a set. So as you
can see it's going to accept any
iterable that you add to the updates. So
this is really a nice method in order to
add several values at once. And by the
way, there is something nice with the
sets. We can use like operators as a
shortcut instead of using the method
name. So, if you want to do an update,
we can do it like this. So, we say the
variable name, then a pipe, and then
equal, and then you can add the items
that you want to add. So, the one and
two. Now, if I go and execute this, I'm
going to get the same effects. It is
like the update allows me to add
multiple values in one go in my sets.
So, that's a have like nice shortcut
instead of writing the updates. Now, how
about to remove values from my set? So,
we learned with the lists that we have a
pop and remove. Either you remove by
value or index. Well, you can go and
remove actually by value like for
example uh 10. And then, we can print
this out. As you can see, we just
removed the 10. And one more thing that
is annoying with the remove, if you use
like a value that is not part of your
sets and executes, you will get an
error. Sometimes this is really annoying
because it's going to break the whole
code. So, it is not really safe. You
have to be careful using the remove.
That's why we have in Python something
like savior in order to remove values,
and that is the discard. So, discard, we
just comment this out. So, it's going to
work like the remove. So, I can go and
remove for example the 10. As you can
see, we don't have a 10 inside my list.
But, if I go and remove an unexisting
value like the 100, nothing going to
happen. I will not get an error. Discard
is really nice. If the item is there,
it's going to go and remove it. But, if
it is not, then simply nothing going to
happen. And by the way, I just tried the
pop. It actually works with the sets,
but it's going to go and remove
something totally random. So, for
example here, it removes the one. So, I
don't recommend you to use the pop at
all. So, as you can see, with the sets,
we have some new methods, the adds,
update, discards, and we cannot use any
method that is using the position or the
index number with the sets.
Okay, so now we come to the interesting
part where we're going to talk about the
mathematical operators in sets. So now
the sets in Python it's like the
mathematical sets that you have learned
in the school or the sets operators that
we use in the SQL. So now sometimes you
have like two sets or two groups of
values and you want to ask questions
like does the values appear in both of
the sets, which values are overlapping,
which values are difference, and the
data structure sets is perfect for those
questions. They are using this hash
mechanism in order to make it very fast
to give you the answers, especially if
you have large data sets. And exactly
for this reason we have in Python some
built-in methods in order to do
comparisons. So now let's deep dive into
those mathematical operations. Okay, so
now let's go and create another set. So
we have some overlapping values like the
30, 40, 50, and 60. So now the first
thing that we could do with those two
sets is how about to combine both the
groups together. And for that we have a
method called union. So you start with
one of the sets, doesn't matter which
one. So you say union and then you pass
to it the other sets. And of course in
order to see the whole thing you going
to go and print it. So let's go and do
that. Now as you can see I'm getting all
the items from both sets. And this is
exactly what the union does. It gives
you every unique value from both of the
sets. So it is just mixing those two
groups together and if there is like
duplicates it going to go and remove it.
So as you can see we have 30 twice but
in the output you have it only once.
Same thing goes for the 40, you have it
as well only once. And it is as well
important to understand we are not
changing the original set. So if you go
and print the A you still have the same
data, the same goes for B. So we are not
changing A and B, we are just merging
them together into new sets. And as
well, we have some nice shortcuts. So,
instead of saying union, you can say A
pipe and then B. So, if you use this
operator, you're going to get the same
exact results. All right, moving on to
the next question. I would like now to
find out the values that both of the
sets are sharing. So, only if the value
exist in both of the sets, I want it to
see it in the output. And for that, we
have the method intersection. So, again,
it doesn't matter where you start. You
can start from B. So, A dot intersection
and then the second set. So, if you want
to see the results, we're going to go
and print it. So, let's try this out.
Now, we are getting only 40 and 30. So,
it is very simple. It is returning the
values that appears in both of the sets.
So, you're going to get only the values
that are overlapping or shared between
the two sets. And same thing, we have as
well some shortcuts. We can say A and B.
So, if you go and execute it, you're
going to get the same results. All
right, moving on to the next question.
So, I would like to have the items that
belongs only to the first group. So,
that means I would like to see the items
that only appears in the first list, but
doesn't overlap with the second list.
And here we have another method called
difference. But you have here to be very
careful where you start. So, I'm saying
here, show me the items in the first
sets that has a difference from the
second set. So, the sides here are
important. Let's go and print the output
and then execute. It's going to gives us
the values that are in A, but not in B.
And of course, my friends, we have some
shortcuts for that as well using an
operator. It going to be very simple if
you use the minus. So, A minus B, you
will get the same results. Now, if you
go and switch it where you say B minus
A, you will get different results. So,
look at this, we are getting 50 and 60
because now we are saying, show me the
items that are in the second set, but
does not belong to the first set, the A.
And in this example, we have the 50 and
60. 40 will not work because we have it
already in the first set. Same goes for
the 30. So, be careful with the
directions as you are using this. So,
now let's go to the next question. How
about that I would like to find what are
values that are not overlapping at all?
So, the exact opposite of the
intersection. Now, of course, you can go
and do the difference twice for each
side, but there is like better way to do
that. For this, we're going to use
something called symmetric difference.
And again, doesn't matter where you
start. So, it can return everything that
is different between the two sets, and
everything that is shared or overlapped
will be excluded. So, let's try this out
and execute. Now, look at this. From the
first sets, we are getting the 10 and 20
because you we cannot find it in B, and
in B, we are getting the 50 and 60
because we cannot find it in A. And of
course, we have an operator for this.
So, we say A carrot and B. If you
execute it, you're going to get the same
results. So, now let's recap. If you
want to get everything from both of the
sets, you're going to use the union. But
now, if you want to return
[clears throat]
only the shared item, the overlapping in
the middle, then you can use the
intersection. But now, if you want to
get exactly the opposite, all the items
that are not overlapping, they are
unique in each set, then you're going to
use the symmetric difference. But now,
if you want to get only one-sided thing,
like only the items that are in one set,
but not in the other, then you're going
to use the difference. Or the opposite,
if you want to get the items that are in
the second, but not in the first. And as
well, you're going to use the
difference. So, this is fun, right? This
is exactly the power of the sets in
Python.
So, now so far, if we [music] have like
two sets, we can merge things, we can
find the differences and overlapping.
But sometimes we want only to understand
the relationship between two sets. We
are just checking. We don't want to
merge anything. And for that, we have as
well methods. So, for example, if I want
to ask this question, is everything in
this set the A is also inside the other
one? And with that, we have a nice
methods. It going to start with is as we
are asking question. So, it's going to
be the is subset. So, is A is subset of
B? Now, let's go and print it and see
what we're going to get. It going to say
false because is subset going to return
true if all items from A exist in B. So,
it tells you if one group is fully
contained in the other. And in this
example, it is not. So, now in order to
get true, let's try this out. We're
going to have 30 and 40. So, the whole A
exist in B. Let's go and execute it. You
can see it is true. And with that, A is
a subset of B. Now, sometimes you want
to do the complete opposite. So, does
the group B contains every single item,
every single value from the other one?
So, it's just the way around. And for
that, we have as well a method that
start with is supersets A. So, the name
says everything, right? Let's go and try
this out. As you can see, we are getting
true. And that's because B contains all
the items of the set A. And now you
might ask, "Okay, when do we use those
stuff in real words?" Well, I've used
this in this scenario. You have a table
that is the master table that contains
all the customers ID. No customer should
be in the business without having an ID
in this table. And sometimes you have
another table that holds as well the
customers information, but it is not the
master table. It is like a subset of
customers for some reason. Maybe the VIP
users. So, now the rule is even if you
have a like a subset of customers
outside, they must be part of the master
table. Otherwise, there's something
wrong in the system. You cannot have
like customers outside this master
table. So, that's why in order to do
quality checks, you can use the is
subset or is superset to make sure it is
clean. Your master table has everything.
So, this is how I use those two methods
in my projects. Now, moving on to
another question that you might ask, do
those two sets shares any items? For
that, we have a method called is
disjoint. This is the last one in this
group and a Now, let's try this out and
print. Now, as you can see, we are
getting false. So, what is going on? It
going to return true when there is no
overlapping between the two sets. The
two sets are completely separated,
disjoints. So, zero values in common.
And of course, in this example, we have
overlapping. We have the 30 and 40. Now,
you can make it working and get true if
you have like values like 10 and 20.
Now, both of the sets, they are not
sharing anything at all. If you go and
execute it, you going to get true. But
of course, with the others, you going to
get false. It's not anymore subsets.
Now, you might ask, "Okay, when do we
need this?" I use this in this scenario
where I had like one big data set and I
wanted to split it into two separate
sets, two two tables. And I wanted to
make sure that everything is splitted
correctly. So, there is no one same
record in both of the set. In order to
do that, we can use the is disjoint to
make sure that there is no overlapping
between them. So, those are three nice
methods in order to check the
relationship between two sets. I'm not
creating anything new. I'm just asking
question and getting yes or no, true or
false. So, my friends, as you can see,
sets in Python, they have their own
personality, they have their own
methods, and it is very different from
the list and the tuples. They focus on
the contents, whether the data is clean,
unique, and we use it in order to
compare multiple data sets together. So,
those are the unique methods for the
sets.
Hey friends. So, now, finally, going to
talk about the most powerful data
[music] structure type in Python, my
favorite one and the one that I keep
using in my real data projects, the
dictionary. [music] So now let's
understand it and why do we need it? The
thing is all the other types of data
structure, the list, the tuple, the
sets, we used them in order to store one
piece of information [music]
at a time. Like for example, we have a
list of names, list of countries, list
of age, but the thing is all those three
informations are stored in different
variables. They are three informations,
but all of them are describing an
entity, a person, a customer. So that
means we don't want them anymore to be
disconnected and spreaded into multiple
variables. We would love to put
everything in one place. And for that we
going to use the data type, the data
structure dictionary. And since we have
different type of informations, we can
have a special structure for this type.
So that means a dictionary lets you
store different type of informations in
key-value pairs, where the key describes
what the data means and the value holds
your actual data. So with that we have
everything that describe the customer in
one place, the name, country and age,
instead of having three separate lists.
And this is exactly the real power of
the dictionary. And the syntax for that
going to be very simple. You can use the
curly brackets and then we going to have
pairs of key values and they going to be
separated with double points or colon
and you going to separate the pairs
using a comma. So nothing crazy, right?
It is easy. Okay, so now the first thing
that we have to do is to understand the
behavior of the dictionary. As we
learned, each type has its own
personality and of course with the
dictionary we can have completely new
things. So now let's go and create very
simple dictionary. So with the curly
brackets. And now we going to go and
create very simple pairs of key values.
The first one going to be A, and its
value going to be 10. The next pair is
B, its value 20, and the last one C, its
value 30. So, we have three pairs of key
values. Now, the first thing that we
want to check is whether the
dictionaries are actually ordered. So,
let's go and test that. As usual, we
just going to go and print it. So, print
my dictionary. Let's go and test. Look
at this. I'm getting from Python exactly
the same order as I defined it in my
structure. So, the first key A, B, and
C. So, that means, my friends,
dictionaries are ordered, which is a
really nice thing. So, now let's go and
check the second one. Can we have
duplicates inside our dictionaries? Now,
of course, we have to define what I mean
with duplicate. Is it a duplicate in the
keys or the values? So, let's first test
the keys. Can I have another like A,
where the value, for example, 40? So,
with that, as you can see, we have
duplicates. We have two keys with the A.
Now, let's go and execute it. Look at
this. Python will not allow duplicates
for the keys. We have only one A, and
now it is interesting which value is
actually Python going to show us. It's
going to be the last one in our
dictionary. So, it's going to show the
40 for the A. So, that means, my
friends, we cannot have duplicates in
the keys. Now, how about the values?
Like, for example, let's say I'm going
to have here another 20. So, we have 20
for B and 20 for C. Does Python going to
allow that? Let's go and execute it.
Look at this. Python doesn't care about
the values. We could have like
duplicates because it is not that
critical like the keys. So, that means
the keys are unique, and the values
allow duplicates.
Okay, so that's all about the
duplicates. Now, let's talk about the
third characteristic. Are dictionaries
indexed? So, can I call any items using
an index? For example, let's say print,
and I would like to access the second
item, this one over here. Can I go go
say my dict, and then the index number
going to be one for the second item.
Let's go and try this out. As you can
see, we are getting an error. We are
getting the key error. So, that means a
dictionary is not indexed. Now, of
course, the question is, is it like the
sets where we cannot access any
individual value? Well, no. In
dictionary, we still can access any
individual value, but not using the
index number or the position number.
Instead, we use keys in order to access
values. So, again, in this example, if I
want to access the second value, the 20,
I don't use the index number like here.
Instead, I use the key. And what is the
key for the second value? It going to be
the B. So, since it is string, we going
to call it by the value string B. So,
now, let's try this out. Look at this,
we are getting now 20. So, we say
dictionary is not indexed, it is keyed.
I can access any value using its key.
So, that's all about the third one, the
index. Now, how about the last one? Can
I change something after creating the
dictionary? So, is it mutable? Let's
test this. For example, I would like to
go and change the third value, the C.
Instead of 20, I would like to have it,
for example, 80. Now, in order to update
the value, we have to access it using
the key. So, it going to be my dict, and
we going to specify the key value, the
C. And then, it's very simple, we going
to go and assign for it the value 80.
And after that, we're going to go and
just print our dictionary. So, let's try
this out. Now, look at this, our key,
the C, has now the value 80. So, we
going to say, "You are mutable." So,
this is how dictionary behaves. It is
ordered, so that means Python going to
maintain the same order as you create
it. Now, about the duplicates, the keys
are unique. You cannot have the same key
more than once, but it doesn't care
about the values. You could have
duplicates. Third one, it is not
indexed. We cannot access the values
using position number or index number.
Instead, we use the keys in order to
access the values, and it is mutable, so
you can anytime go and change the values
of your dictionary. So, because of the
key values, we have here different
things compared to the others.
>> [music]
>> So now, my friends, since the
dictionaries are very special, very
different from the others because of
this key value structure, we have in
Python special methods, functions,
operators specially for the
dictionaries. So now, let's go through
them one by one. So now, let's go and
create a very simple dictionary of a
user where we have, for example, an ID
like one, and let's go for age like 30,
and then a city like Berlin.
So now, the first thing that we have to
learn is like how to access a
dictionary, and as we learned, we access
them using the keys. So, you're going to
call it like this, very simple, and
let's go, for example, for a city. Of
course, it's going to be like a string
value. So, if you go and execute it, you
will get the value of this key. So, it
is very simple and easy, but there's an
issue. What happens if the key is
missing? A key is not part of my
dictionary. Like, for example, let's go
for the name. So, we don't have a name
here. If you go and execute it, you will
get an error, and this is not really
nice because it's going to go and break
the whole execution of your code. So, it
is not really safe. That's why, if you
are not really sure about your keys, we
have another nice method in Python
called get. So, it's going to looks like
this. Print, and then user, and then
dots. It is a method, so we call get,
and now we pass for it the key name, the
name. So, let me just comment this out
and try this out. You can see, we are
getting in the output none, and it is
not breaking my code. So, it is saying,
"Okay, we have a missing value. There is
nothing." And of course, if you use the
age, it's going to work, so it's going
to return the value. So, the get
method's return value or none. And if
you say, "You know what? I really don't
like to have like a none in the output.
I would like to have something like
meaningful or easy to understand."
That's why you can pass to it as well a
default value like unknown.
So, if you go and execute it, you're
going to get something more friendlier.
It says unknown. So, this one is the
safest way on how to access a
dictionary's data. Now, moving on, we
can do few checks on our dictionary.
Like for example, you can check whether
the key exist in your dictionary. Like
for example, we can say print and I'm
going to check whether the age is a part
or a member of my dictionary. So, age in
user. Let's go and execute it. As you
can see, we are getting true. Now, let's
go and check another one like the name.
So, if you go and execute it, you will
get false. So, it is nice double check
on your keys of the dictionary. And of
course, you can go and use the
not in. And with that, we are getting
now true. Now, we can move to another
set of methods that are special for
dictionaries. They are the view objects.
So, it gives you like insights about the
structure of your dictionary. Let's have
an example. They are very simple. So,
we're going to say print user.
And now, the first one is to get all the
keys of your dictionary using the method
keys. So, if you go and execute it, as
you can see, it is returning all the
keys of your dictionary, the ID, age,
city without any values. So, with that,
you understand, "Okay, this is the
structure of my dictionary." Nice. With
that, we are getting the keys, but now
how about to get only the values? So,
the opposite. We can go and use the
methods user.
values. So, that's very simple. If you
go and execute it, this time instead of
getting only the keys, we are getting
only the values without keys. And now,
if you say, "You know what? I would like
to get both of them, the keys and the
values in one go." And for that, we have
a very important method called items.
So, if you call user.items
and execute, you will get both of them.
So, you will get the pair of key and
values. So, ID one, age three, and so
on. And now, you might say, "Okay, but
why should I use items if I just can go
and print, for example, the user as it
is? And with that, I'm going to get as
well the pairs." So, the thing is, if
you just want to display the whole
dictionary, then yes, you can go with
that print user. But, with the items, as
you can see, we are getting like a list
of tuples, right? It is not anymore
dictionary, which can makes it easier to
loop, to unpack, to do transformations,
which is something that we're going to
use a lot in order to deal with the
dictionaries. So, let's go and check the
looping. Now, as we learned before, we
can loop like this: for you in user,
double points, and we can go and print
the item. So, if you go and execute it,
as you can see, we are getting now only
the keys of our dictionary. We are not
getting the values. In order for you to
get the values, you're going to call
again the dictionary, and then you have
to pass for it each item as a key in
order to access the value. So, if you go
and execute it, yes, you're going to get
the keys and the values, but this is not
really the cleanest way on how like to
iterate through a dictionary. So, I
don't really like this. Instead, we're
going to use more modern way. So, now,
since we need two things from our
dictionary, we're going to go and define
two variables, the key and the value.
And then, we're going to say in and this
time, instead of just using the variable
of the dictionary, we're going to use
the method items. So, we're going to say
items and double points. So, now, what
we're going to print, it's just the key
and value. So, let's go and execute it.
As you can see, we are getting the exact
same results. And if you just go and
compare both of those stuff, you can see
the second method, it is like way
cleaner in order to read and as well to
work on. So, that's why, if you want to
work with the dictionaries, we don't
just use directly the variable name. We
use the amazing methods items. All
right, so now let's talk about how to
change a dictionary. The first thing is
how to add a new key value pairs. Let's
say that I would like to go and add a
name to the user. So, we call the
variable name and then we define the new
key. It's going to be the name. And then
here very important, we don't use the
double points since it is now as a
variable and I'm doing assignments. I'm
going to go and add a value like for
example John. So, let's check our
dictionary now.
As you can see, at the end of our
dictionary we have a new key value name
John. So, with that Python is adding
something new to our dictionary at the
end. But if you would like to go and
change the values of already existing
key like for example the age, we still
going to use the same methods. So, we're
going to use the variable. We're going
to call it by the key and we can assign
for it a new value like for example 35.
So, let me just print it again. Now, as
you can see, Python is not adding
something new. It is just now updating
the already existing key. So, as you can
see, assigning values in dictionaries,
you can do actually two things. You can
add a new pairs if the key is totally
new to the dictionary or you can update
an already existing key by assigning new
values to it. So, as you can see, it's
really easy. Now, since we're talking
about the updates, there is another way
on how to update multiple values because
if I want to update a lot of values in
the dictionary, I'm going to end up like
creating a new line for each key value.
Instead, we can use the methods update.
Let me show you. So, update. And now
inside it we're going to put multiple
key values in order to update the
dictionary. So, it's like you are
defining a new dictionary. So, we're
going to start for example, let's say
I'm going to go and update the age. And
here be careful, we are using the double
points not the assignment. So, here
we're going to say 40. The second one,
let's say I'm going to change the city
and update it to Paris.
So, let's try this out. Now, look at
this. In one go, I'm updating multiple
keys. So, the age is 40 and the city is
Paris. So, this is really nice. Now,
let's talk about removing. As we used in
the list, we can use the method pop. So,
let's try this out. Let's say that I
would like to go and remove the age. So,
we can say user.pop.
And of course, here we cannot specify
indexes. I'm going to specify the key.
So, remove the age and if you go and
print it,
the age should be removed. So, look at
this. We don't have an age. And as you
know, pop return actually the item that
is removed. So, we can create a variable
called age and assign it to our methods.
And actually, you can go and print it.
So, removed item, then we can say the
age. Let's go and execute it. So, as you
can see, the age is removed and the item
that or the value that is removed is 40.
Now, let's say that you have done a
mistake where you are targeting like a
wrong key. Like for example, a salary.
We don't have a salary inside our
dictionary. go and execute it, you're
going to get an error. And again, this
is not really safe because it is
breaking the whole code, the whole
program. Now, what you can do actually,
you can define a default value if the
code breaks. Like for example, we can
say not found. If you go and execute it,
now look at this. The removed item is
actually not found. So, we are getting
the default value if your key is
missing. So, this is more safe instead
of like breaking the whole code. So now,
how about to use the same thing where I
don't define anything? say pop. So, in
the list, we're going to remove the last
item. Now, if I do this, is the last
item going to be removed? Let's try this
out. Now, as you can see, you're going
to get an error. It says Python is
expecting you to use an argument. So,
you cannot leave it empty like we have
done for the list. You have always to
specify something. But, if you still
want to remove the last item without
specifying the key, there is another
method called pop item. So, let's try
this out.
And we say user, and then execute. Now,
our list don't have the last item. So,
we don't have name equal to join. So, it
is removing the last pairs of your
dictionary. Okay, so now let's move to
something very cool about the
dictionaries. So, let's say I'm going to
talk about the creation of a new
dictionary. So, for example, I'm going
to create a dictionary called user, but
at the start, I don't know the values.
So, the ID is equal to none, and as
well, I don't know the name. So, it's
going to be none. Same thing goes for
the age, and then a city, and the same
thing, none. So, now as you can see, I'm
repeating the same thing. I'm just
defining the dictionary, and since I
don't know the values, I keep repeating
none none none. And imagine you have
like 20 lists, you're going to repeat
the same thing like 20 times. So, the
issue here, I have a list of keys, and I
want them all to start with the same
value. And for that, we have a solution
from Python, something very elegant
called from keys. So, let me show you
how it works. We can say user, and then
we're going to say dict.
And then the method from keys. And you
have to pass for it two things. First,
the list of the keys. So, you can create
a list where you have all the keys like
the ID, name, age, and city. It is very
simple list of all keys. And the second
thing is actually we pass the value, and
you have to write it only once. So, we
say none. Let's go and print our
variable user, and see what's going to
happen. The first thing happened here is
the method created brand a new
dictionary. We have all the keys that we
have defined in the list, and all those
keys has the value none. So, that means
Python took this value and assign it to
the ID, to the name, to the age, to the
city, and everything in one line. How
elegant is that? And of course, for
example, if you go and say zero, then
you will get the output zeros for each
key. So, this is how I usually do it if
I create a brand a new dictionary where
I still don't know the values and
everything should be at the start is
missing or none, then I create my
dictionary using this method and later
through the program, I start of course
changing the values by using the key.
For example, here the age going to be
like 40. So, we use this only initially
in order to build a structure of our
struct.
And as a data engineer, oh my god, I use
all time dictionaries in my scripts if I
want to add manually data inside my
scripts. The first and the most obvious
use case is whenever I query a database
or let's say an API and in return we
retrieve something like records and
usually we use dictionaries in order to
fill those informations. So, very
typical SQL stuff. You got the columns
that are the keys and the values inside
those columns. And now another very
common use case for the dictionaries, we
use it in order to do mapping. Like for
example, translating a technical weird
values that comes from the sources to
something more friendly. Now, most of
the systems stores data in very short
way in order to make everything fast,
but if you show those informations
directly to a business or end user, they
might not understand what are those
values. That's why we use dictionaries
in order to do the mapping between the
technical hard values to the friendly
easy values. Like here maybe the status
of ordering something like in the
database could be like one, two, or
three, but I want to translate it for my
business users. I'm I'm going to call it
open, in progress, and done. Another
very famous example of mapping is
actually mapping the abbreviations to
the full text of the countries. Like for
example, the abbreviations of the
countries d e f r e n that stands for
Germany, France, and India. So, again,
it is mapping between two things, and
here it is the abbreviation and the full
name. So, those stuff we use it all time
in Python projects. And now we come to
something as well very common. We use
dictionaries in order to store
environment variables and
configurations. If you go to any real
projects, you're going to find this
config Python file where you're going to
find a lot of dictionaries, and it looks
like this. Usually, we connect our
system to multiple external systems, and
we need to store that connection
informations like the server name, the
port, the user, but we don't store
passwords. So, usually we put all those
connection informations in dictionaries
like this. And as well, if you are a
data engineer, usually you have a lot of
parameters in order to control the run
of the batch of the ETL pipeline. So,
there are a lot of configurations to
tell the ETL how to load the data from A
to B. And usually in real projects, it's
going to looks like this, and we use
dictionaries for it. And another use
case that I use dictionaries in my real
projects, I use it in order to store the
metadata. It is one of the most
important thing that you do in your data
projects is to store the structure of
your data. Like for example, the SQL
tables or the JSON files. Again, the
metadata is like data about data, but
here we don't see any like customers. We
just see the structure. So, in this
table customers, we have columns like
the ID, the name, the age, country. And
then for each column, there is like
extra information. What is the data type
of the ID? It is integer, string,
whether it is nullable or not. So, I'm
just describing the structure of the
customers. And this what we call, my
friend, metadata. And almost all the
time we use dictionaries to describe it
in our scripts. And usually, we use this
then later in order to process the data
correctly in our data platforms. So,
this is one of the most important use
case for dictionaries in data projects.
>> [music]
>> And now, mix it's time to challenge you.
So, now again we have our dictionary
where we have ID, name, age, and city.
And now, I want you to return a new
dictionary that has only key-value pairs
where the value is a string, and all
those string values must be converted to
uppercase. So, in this example, it must
return only the name and the city, and
the values must be uppercase. But, you
have to do the whole thing in an elegant
way. So, pause the video and try this
out. Now, if you look to this task, we
have actually to do two things. We want
to do filtering because we want to keep
only string values, and the other thing
we want to do data transformations. We
are converting them to an uppercase. And
you remember with the list, if you want
to do those two things, we use the
comprehensions. And comprehensions has
three blocks: the expression, the for
loop, and the last one the filter. So,
let's do it step by step. Let's start
with the variable name. Let's say it's
user string, something like this, and
it's going to be a dictionary. But,
inside it we have three blocks. So, now
what we need? We need an expression, we
need a loop, and we need a filter. So,
now usually I start with the loop since
it is the easiest one. So, for And now,
we need two variables because we have
always two things: key and value. And we
will not loop directly from the
variable. We can use the method items.
So, as we learned, this is the best way
on how to iterate through dictionary
using the items. Now, let's go talk
about the filter. So, I want to keep
only the pairs where the value is a
string. So, we're going to make a
condition if So, now in order to check
the data type, we have a really nice
function called is instance, and we're
going to pass to it two things: the
value and the data type that we are
checking for. So, we are checking for
string, str. If this is true, the value
is a data type string, it will be kept
in our dictionary. Otherwise, the
numbers, the one and the 30, they are
not string, that's why they will not be
kept inside our dictionary. So, we have
the loop, we have the filter, and the
last one we want to do the data
transformation, right? So, the
expression going to be like this. What
do we have? We have always key values,
so key double point value. So, now if I
leave it like this, actually nothing
going to happen to the key or to the
value. It can stay as it is. All what we
are doing here is just looping and
filtering. But actually, I would like to
change the value. So, I would like to
apply for it some method or function. As
for that, we going to apply the method
upper. So, by looking to this, the key
should stay as it is, but the value must
be transformed to an upper case. That's
it, actually.
We have transformation, [snorts]
loop, and filter. Let's try this out and
print it. So, we want to print the new
dictionary. Now, look at this. We have
done the task. We have only key pairs
where the value is a string. So, we
don't have an ID, we don't have an age.
And at the same time, the values are now
upper cased. So, this is the dictionary
comprehensions. It is very elegant way
to do multiple stuff in one go. And if
you do it step-by-step, it will not be
hard. course, you can put the whole
thing in one line. Now, if I look at
this, I think the most confusing one
going to be the first one. So, now I'm
going to show you a few stuff. If I just
remove it, I just keep the key value and
execute, you can see the key and the
value, they have the exact same stuff
from the original dictionary. But if I
would like to manipulate something, the
key or the value, I can add stuff here.
Like, for example, I would like to have
the keys as an upper case. So, this time
I'm just transforming the keys. Now,
look at this. The keys are now upper
cased. And I can say, "You know what?
Let's go and make
the values as the lower cased." So, I'm
transforming both the keys and the
values. You can see John and Berlin are
now lower cased. So, it is really easy
way to manipulate the keys and values in
the dictionary. [music] It is really
nice, right? Okay, so now let's have a
full recap about the dictionaries. So,
dictionary is a data type structure that
allows us to store multiple related
informations in one place using key
value pairs. The syntax is very simple.
We use the curly brackets, then we
define key value, and in between we have
the colon, the double points, and we
separate the pairs using comma. And
dictionaries behave like this. They are
ordered, so they remember the order you
inserted things. The keys must be
unique. You cannot have the same key
more than once, but you can have
duplicate and repeat the values as you
want. And dictionaries are not indexed,
so you cannot use the position number to
access any value. Instead, they are
keyed. That means you use the key in
order to access its value. And the last
one, they are mutable, so you can go and
update, insert, or delete anytime. Now,
since dictionaries are really special
one, we have for them as well special
methods. Like the method keys, it gives
us all the keys. The method values, it
shows us all the values. And the
important one, the items, it going to
return pairs of key values. This is
really important in order to do
iteration. We have method update in
order to change or insert multiple
values in one go. We have the pop items
which removes the last added pair. And
now, because of this special structure,
we use dictionaries in many scenarios in
real projects. Like for example, we use
it in order to do mapping between
abbreviations and long names, or between
technical names to friendly values. And
we use dictionaries in order to store
configurations, like environment
variables, the API settings, the
database connections. So, anything you
want to keep grouped together in one
place. And this is something we need a
lot in projects. So, that's it. [music]
This is the full big picture of the
dictionaries. I know I might be sounded
like excited about this data type, but I
want you to understand as well this is
really important topic because we use
this data type almost everywhere in
projects. [music] So, practice and make
sure you master this type.
All right. Now, what we're going to do
we're going to go and compare all those
four types, the list, tuples, sets, and
dictionary side by side to understand
the differences between them. So, first,
lists are flexible ones. They keep their
order. They let you have duplicates. You
can grab things by the index number, and
you can change them whenever you want.
So, you can add, remove, update stuff.
Next, we have the tuple. It is very
similar to the list, so it is ordered.
It allow duplicates. You can use an
index to access any value, but the only
difference here it is frozen. It is
protected. Once you create them, they
going to stay the way they are. You
cannot change them. So, it is perfect
when you want something that should not
be touched. The third type it is the
sets, and this one can be really
restrictive. So, they do not care about
the order. They will not accept
duplicates. You cannot use an index to
access any value. I know there is a lot
of negativity, but they are great when
you care about making sure that each
item is unique, and it is great tool in
order to compare multiple sets of data.
This has a lot of use cases. And
finally, we come to my favorite one the
dictionaries. So, they are the one with
the key values. So, they going to keep
their order. And now, about the
duplicates, the keys must be unique, but
the values can be repeated. And you
cannot access the values by using an
index number. Instead, we use the key in
order to access any value. And the last
one it is mutable. That means you can go
and change anything you want in the
dictionary. So, as you can see each type
has its own personality and
characteristics, and those are the major
differences between them.
And now, my friends, I remember [music]
the first time that I learned about the
data structure, the list, double, and
all that stuff.
It was, to be honest, confusing for me.
Yes, I learned what are the main
differences between them, but I still I
didn't understand how to use them in
real projects. So, it was confusing at
the start, but after I have done some
projects, I got like a decision tree on
how to choose the right one. So, now I'm
going to show you that. So, by default,
I end up using each time the list. So,
without any special reason to choose
something else or a reason to avoid the
list, most of the time I work with the
lists. So, it's going to be fine. Don't
worry about it. But now, if we found
actually a special reason, like for
example, the data must be protected,
must not be changed, so no changes are
allowed, then I don't use the list. I go
with the double. And another special
reason could be if the data must be
unique and you want some performance,
then I avoid using a list and start
using a set. And specially if I want to
compare multiple data sets together. And
a third special reason not to use a list
is if you want to do mapping. So, once I
have the feeling that I have multiple
informations and I'm mapping stuff
together, then I'm going to go and use
the dictionary instead of a list. So,
it's like one thing is pointing to
another thing. Where whenever your data
has like a label, has a value, then I'm
going to go and use dictionary. So, it
is very simple, my friends. Default is
to use a list until you have a special
purpose. And based on the special
purpose, then you can use either double,
set, or dictionary based on the
requirements that you have. If it's
frozen, then double. If it's unique,
then set. If you have mapping, then
dictionary. So, this is my decision tree
on when to use which type. And if I have
a look to all my projects, I can tell
you there are like two types that I use
all time. The most used one is a list
inside my scripts and the second one is
dictionary. The tuple and the set, it
was like only few times I used it
compared to the list and the dictionary.
So, this is my experience about those
four types. My friends, I know that was
a big chapter, that was a big thing, but
with that you have learned how to work
with the data structure. This is very
important step. Now, by looking back to
our road map, now we're going to go to
the final layer. We have the functions.
So, this [music] time you're going to
learn how to think like professional
Python developer. You're going to learn
how to design a reusable logic, how to
break complex problems into smaller
pieces. So, it's like you are learning
how to build your own machine inside
your Python code. So now, let's deep
dive into functions and of course we're
going to start with the fundamentals.
Hey friends, so now we're going to talk
about the most important concepts that
you will learn in programming. It is
what separate casual coding from
professional coding. I'm talking here
about the functions. This is of course
not a Python thing. You're going to find
functions in every programming language.
And to be honest, learning functions can
get you overwhelmed and confused at the
start. That is totally normal. So, don't
rush it, but I need you here full
focused because this is a skill that we
need to get right. And my friends, don't
worry. I'm going to take you step by
step from the very basics about the
functions and then I'm going to walk you
through to the advanced topics where
you're going to learn how we write
functions in real projects. So now,
let's start with the basics and we're
going to start with the first question.
What is a function? A function is a
small reusable block of code that does
one specific job. It's like a machine
that can take an input and it can return
something back. So, actually that's it.
It's very simple, but we have to
understand now exactly what this [music]
means and why do we have even functions?
So now, with is, as [music] you are
coding, you usually write a small logic
or flow in order to solve a small
problem. Now, over the time, you might
face a very similar problem where the
logic going to be almost the same as the
previous one. So, what you're going to
do? You're going to go and copy the code
and paste it. At the start, this sounds
really okay, but over the time, you're
going to find out that the same logic
exist multiple times in your code. And
this is the start of the chaos because
imagine you found a bug or something
wrong inside this logic or maybe over
the time the requirement changed. So,
now things get really annoying because
you have to remember all the places
where you use this logic and then do the
changes. And believe me, in real
project, your code going to be really
massive. And of course, I promise you,
at least you're going to miss one. So,
now if some of the logic got updated,
the others using the old logic, which
going to make the result of your code
inaccurate. So, that means if you leave
it like this, it's going to be really
hard to change. And as well, it's going
to be really hard for you to read. It's
going to be really big scripts. And
you're going to get the feeling that
it's going to be really risky to touch
anything in your code. So, the bigger
your project gets, the worse this
becomes. And of course, what is the
solution for this? We're going to use
functions. So, instead of repeating the
same logic over and over, you're going
to take your logic and put it in one
place inside the function. And whenever
you need this logic, this behavior, you
just call the function. So, you don't
rewrite it, you don't copy and paste,
you are just reusing the same logic
whenever you want. And by doing this,
actually, all the problems going to
disappear. So, since everything in one
place, if you found, for example, a bug
or something wrong in the logic or maybe
the requirement changed, all what you
have to do is to just to go to the
function and do the change only once.
And with that, every part of your
program that is using it automatically
going to get the new behavior or the new
updates. That means, my friends, the
change is going to be very fast cuz you
are just changing one code. You are not
changing like multiple things. And very
important as well, it is now more safe
to change the codes. You are no longer
touching many parts of your codes. You
are just changing one clear isolated
piece. Now, another big win is that your
code going to be smaller because you
don't have any more repetitions, which
going to make your code first of all
readable and as well it's going to be
easy for everyone to understand your
code. And by using functions as well, it
improves the collaborations in projects.
For example, we can split the work. One
person can work on the function and
another one can work on the rest of the
code. And another thing since we are
talking about teams, it as well speed up
the projects. And this is what usually
happen. Different developers going to
work on similar problems. So now instead
of each one of them writing the code
from the scratch, we can start reusing
stuff. So you can say for example, "Hey,
I already done this issue. I have a
function for it. So just go and reuse
it." With that, we save a lot of time.
We avoid reinventing the wheel and the
whole project going to be faster. And
now we come to the last benefit of using
function. Functions going to introduce
something called modularity. So this is
way of breaking big complex problem into
smaller manageable pieces. So that means
functions, it is one tool in order to
overcome complex problems where you
divide and conquer. You divide the
problems into smaller pieces and you put
them in different functions. So that
means as you learn functions, you are
actually learning how to think like a
developer. Those are my top reasons why
functions are one of the most important
topics in Python.
All right my friends, so now we come to
a topic where I totally understand if
you tell me, "You know what, Parwez, we
already learned about functions. So we
have the string, the number, the data
structure functions. Are we going to
learn more functions now?" Well, the
thing is all those functions are
built-in functions. So something that
already exist and we are just using it.
Now we are talking about functions that
you can create from the scratch. So that
means my friends, there are like
different sources where functions come
from. Let me show you what I mean. So
the first source of functions and the
simplest one is the built-in functions
and that comes directly with Python.
They are always there. You don't need to
install or import anything. You just go
and use them. We already worked with
many of them like the print, the length,
type, changing the data types and
string. We already used them a lot
without thinking about it. The second
source is the one that comes from
libraries and here we have like two
types of libraries. The first one is the
Python standards library. This one is
written by Python team. So the thing is
those functions are very specific and
advanced that they don't expect you to
use it all time in your code. So that
means first we have to import the
library and only after that we can start
using its function. Now for example, we
have the module math. If you want to do
advanced calculations on numbers. And
another one we have the date time and
random. So this is one source. Another
source called external libraries. These
libraries are written by the community,
by other developers or maybe as well by
companies and they were nice enough to
share it with us. Now in order to use
them we have to do an extra step. So
first we have to install the external
libraries because they don't come with
Python and then after that we have to
import them and finally you can start
using its function. Now there are a lot
famous libraries like the pandas to do
data analysis and to clean up the data.
Another one is the matplotlib in order
to do data visualizations. We have the
numpy to work with numbers and arrays.
And my friends, this one is the biggest
strings of Python. They are outside
thousands of people that are working on
solutions and sharing it in libraries.
And to be honest, this is what we do in
projects. All what we have to do is to
just plug and play, install, import and
reuse work that already exist. So now
for those two sources, the built-in and
the libraries, you don't have to deal
with the definition of the function. So
you don't have to know exactly what is
inside the function, you just use them.
Other people get to deal with the
definitions and work on it. But now
still my friend, there are some
scenarios in your projects things going
to get very specific and you have to
write your own definition, your own
functions. We call them user-defined
functions. So this time we will not
install or import anything, we have to
define the function and then of course
use it. So we are doing things from the
scratch. So those are the three
different sources of functions and now
of course the question is, if I have a
problem and I want to solve it, which
source should I use? There is a simple
golden rule for that. If you follow it,
you are already thinking like a
professional. Before you write any piece
of code like a function from the
scratch, always check if it already
exists somewhere else. So just don't
reinvent the wheel. So here how to do
it. First check the built-in functions
because they are already there and they
are usually very safe and fast to use.
You are not finding anything, then go
and check the standard libraries because
they are already installed and trusted.
So all that you have to do is install,
import and use. Now if you don't find
the solution in the libraries, then it
must be written from a scratch. But now
even here before you start writing it on
your own, go and ask your team. So check
your project and ask your colleagues
because this is the nature of projects,
the same problems or let's say the same
logic shows up again and again and maybe
one of your colleagues already solved it
and built a function for it. So all that
you have to do is to just reuse the
already existing function. But now it
could happen that that you didn't find
anything. So your problem is very
specific. Only in this case, you going
to go and write it on your own from the
scratch. So the idea is very simple,
always check whether it already exists
and reuse it before you write anything
or any function from the scratch. So
this is how we decide on which source we
should use. And now, of course, we're
going to focus on the user-defined
functions. So, let's dive in.
>> [music]
>> Now, the user-defined function has
[music] two parts, the function
definition and the function call. The
function definition, or sometime we call
it declaration, it is where you describe
the function. So, what the function
should do. And the sentence for that
starts with the keyword def, so that
Python understand, "Aha, this is a
definition of a function." And after
that, you specify the function name. So,
it is just any name that you give it.
Then, parentheses and a colon. Now,
below that, we're going to have the
block of code. Of course, we're going to
use the indentation in order for Python
to understand this is the body of the
function. And here, depend on the logic,
we can add some normal Python code, like
assigning values to variables or making
a loop with conditional statements, or
maybe call another built-in function.
So, with that, Python understand the
definition of your function, it
understand what it should do, but
nothing runs yet. That's why we have the
second part. The function call is how
you use the function. And it is very
simple, you just write the function name
followed by parentheses. So, once Python
sees it, it's going to go and execute
the function, like any other built-in
function that we used before. So, very
simple, the definition, you describe
your function, and the call, it is where
you execute your code. Now, let's have a
very simple example in order to
understand how Python going to execute
it behind the scenes. So, we're going to
add print at the start and print at the
end. And our function going to be very
simple, it is a greet function where it
has only one thing to do, to print
hello. So, that's it. Now, if you
execute this, as usual, Python going to
start from the top. So, the first line
they're going to go and print the start
in the output, nothing fancy. Then, it's
going to go to the next line, and now
Python going to see a def. So, it has to
define a function. Now, how it's going
to do it? Python will not go to the next
line inside the function, to the print
hello, and execute it. instead. Python
going to go and create an object in the
memory and then it's going to put inside
it the function name, the body of the
function, and some extra stuff. So, the
definition step means it is only saving
the function inside the memory without
executing whatever inside the function.
So, nothing happens so far on the screen
and now Python going to go to the next
step, which is not inside. It going to
go to the call of the function. So,
Python going to see the function call
three times. So, it's going to go and
check the memory and it's going to find
it. So, now what can happen, it's going
to go inside the body of the function
and start executing it line by line from
the top to the bottom. Well, here we
have only one line, so it's going to be
very simple. Python going to print in
the output hello. After that, Python
going to exit your function and goes
back to your code where it was. So, it's
going to go to the next line, print end.
It is a normal line of code. So, at the
output we're going to see start, hello,
and end. So, I just want you to
understand this one thing. If you define
a function, that's means Python is
creating an object in the memory and
that's means it is not yet executing the
function and the function call going to
be the one that going to execute it. So,
this is how Python works internally with
a user-defined functions. Now, let's
slow down. Let's have a break. I would
like to let you know something about
everything takes time. So, if you are
feeling everything is overwhelming and
there are a lot of things and ideas and
you might start forgetting things, this
is totally normal because learning any
new skill just need time. It's like
everything else in life, right? Your
body need time if you want to make money
as well, it need times. Same thing for
[music] the skills like Python. It just
need time. I hope this helps. Now, let's
go back.
Okay, so now let's practice a little
bit. First, I'm going to show you why we
need functions. So, let's have a very
simple example where we are describing
our morning routine. So, the first thing
that I do usually is to wake up. I am a
morning guy, so I wake up at 5:00. After
that, the first thing I do is I need my
coffee. So, I'm going to start the
coffee machine. So, now I'm describing
the process. After that, I'm going to
make the coffee. And the last step is
I'm going to drink it. So, I'm going to
enjoy it. Now, after I have my first
coffee, I will be working for a while.
So, I will do stuff. Previously, I
worked on my full-time job, but now I'm
just making content. Now, after a while
usually I need my second cup of coffee.
So, I need to do the whole process
again. So, I'm going to start the
machine, make the coffee, enjoy it. So,
what I'm going to do, I'm going to copy
the whole thing and just put it over
here and then keep working, having
lunch, and etc. Now, let's go and print
this first in the output. Now, I can see
all my steps. Now, as you can see, we
have a process. We have a logic that
exist actually twice. And this is not a
nice thing because I might do changes to
this process. Like, for example, it
maybe I start drinking some different
type of coffee where I add the milk to
it. Now, if I want to go and add this
step, I have to do it over here. Add
milk. And then I have to make sure that
the same step is as well added in the
next workflow. So, after making the
coffee, I will go and add the milk. Now,
let's go and execute it. Now, we have
those steps, but as you can see, it was
a little bit annoying where I have to
make sure to make the same change twice.
But, this is not really nice. Instead,
we're going to put the whole logic of
making the coffee in one function, in
one place, and call it whenever we want.
So, how we going to do it? Usually,
we're going to go to the top of our code
at the start and we use the keyword def.
So, with that, we are defining our
function. And now, we have to come up
with a function name. Like, for example,
make coffee. And after that, we have to
put the parentheses and the colon. So,
now we are ready. After that, hit enter.
Python going to gives you the
indentation, the four spaces. And now,
what we want is to put our logic, the
process inside it. It start from here
until enjoying the coffee. So, I'm going
to cut it from here and then put it in
the body of the function. But, this will
not work. We have to go and give it a
tab. With that, we have the indentation
and Python can understand, "Aha, those
four lines belongs to the function make
coffee." Okay, so now let's go and just
execute it. Now look at the daily
routine, it is not correct anymore. So
wake up, working for a while, where is
my coffee in between? And that's because
Python will not execute those steps. We
are just defining the function, so
Python just creating the objects without
executing it. Now in order to execute
it, it going to be very easy. We will
just use our nice function name. So as
you can see, even the editor now is
suggesting the function name. So make
coffee and then the double parentheses
and that's it. So now let's go and
execute it. Look at this, we have again
our daily routine. And now I just
noticed that I have a typo with the
machine and this is perfect because I
can show you now the benefit of having
function. Now everything in one place, I
just have to do the change and the fix
only once. So I'm going to go over here
and say machine and that's it. I don't
have to go to the second place because I
will remove those steps and just use the
function call again. So make coffee and
double parentheses. So as you can see,
it was very easy to fix in one place.
Now if I go and execute it, with that we
have everything correct. So as you can
see, the output going to stay the same.
There is no extra stuff that's going to
happen. It is just we developers how we
work with the logic, with our codes. So
we are organizing and making things more
usable and we are reducing the risk of
making mistakes. And now if I decide to
make a third cup of coffee, it's going
to be just calling the function. I don't
have to copy and paste anything. So just
the function name and execute and with
that I'm going to get my third cup of
coffee. So this is the magic of using
functions in Python. So my code is
simple, it is easy to read, easy to
write, easy to understand and everything
is now more professional. All right, so
now I'm going to show you quickly the
different source of functions that we
have in Python. The first one as we
said, it is the built-in function. So,
for example, if I'm calculating the
length of a word like Python, so
actually that's it. This is a built-in
function and we are just calling.
So now, let's go and try a function from
library. For example, let's have a
number like 4.2. This is a decimal
number, but I would like to have a whole
number. And in order to do that, we have
different ways. One of them is using
ceiling. So now, we don't have out of
the box like a built-in function in
order to do the ceiling, but we have a
nice function inside the Python standard
library from the module math. Now, of
course, I cannot go and just use it. So,
it is like this seal, and then we pass
for it a decimal number. As you can see,
Python going to have it like as a white.
And if you execute it, you're going to
get an error. So, Python does not
understand what is seal. And that's
because it is not built-in. We have to
import it first. So, what we're going to
do, we usually do it at the start. So,
we're going to go and import the module
math. And in order to tell Python that
this function comes from this module, we
have to put before it the math. dots.
And now it is green. And now Python can
understand, "Aha, this comes from the
standard library." So, if you go and
execute it, you will not get an error.
And we are getting now a whole number
using a ceiling. That means we are first
importing. And then we call. So now, as
you can see, for those functions that we
are using, we don't know the definition.
So, we don't know the block of code that
is used in order to do the job. So, we
don't have to know the code behind those
functions. But for the third type, the
user-defined
function, of course, we have to define
it and we have to tell Python exactly
what are the steps. So, for example, we
are just greeting. Greet and then colon.
And then the definition is simple. So,
hello. And then a new line, but make
sure you are outside. We just go and
call the function. So, let's go and
execute it. With that, we have hello.
So, what are the steps? You define first
and then call. So now, my friends, it
really depends on the editor and the
theme that you are using. But for me,
once I see a green, that means it is a
function. And those are quickly the
three Python sources for functions.
So far, we have covered all the basics
about the Python function. Now, we have
to take things to the next level where
we have to understand something really
important, how our data actually move
through a function. So, we're going to
learn things like the parameters,
arguments, how to return an output of a
function. And we have to understand as
well that different types, shapes, and
purposes [music] of functions. So, let's
dive in.
Now, before we start talking about the
syntax, [music] we have to understand
one core idea. Not all functions work
the same way. So, some functions like we
learned before, they don't take any
data. So, the data doesn't go inside or
there is no data goes outside. It is
just a block of code that's going to run
and do something and then stop. That's
it. But there is another shape of
function that actually takes data in.
So, it has an input, it's going to
perform an action, and then stops. That
means it has no output. There will be no
data going outside. And some other shape
where you have a function that it accept
an input. So, it takes data in, then it
transform it, and then it return the
result as an output. The data going to
get out of the function. So, data goes
in and data goes out. But with different
shape after it get transformed. Of
course, some functions takes multiple
inputs. So, multiple data goes inside,
then something going to happen. Then
they're going to do calculations and
transformations, and then you could have
as well multiple outputs. Multiple data
are going outside. So, as you can see,
you can design the function the way that
you need. You have different shapes. You
could let data go in and as well go out.
Now, in Python, we have different
terminology about the input and the
output. We call the data that goes in
through an input, we we it parameters
and arguments. And the data that comes
out, we call it return value. So, from
now on I will not say like an output and
an input, we're going to use those
terminology. So, this is the big
picture, different shapes means
different data flow. And now we're going
to deep dive into the input, the
parameters [music] and the arguments.
So, let's go.
So now, what are parameters and
arguments? The parameters are names that
you write in the function definition in
order to describe what kind of data the
function expects. So, you are describing
the input. The arguments are the real
values that you pass when you call the
function. So, they are your actual data
that is used when the function is
executed. And of course, this might
sound a little bit confusing, but in
order to understand it, I'm going to
show you an example and how things works
behind the scenes. Okay, so now first,
let's talk about the syntax. As we
learned before, if you want to build a
function, you need two blocks. You need
the function definition and as well the
function call. So now, what we're going
to do, we're going to extend it in order
to accept data in. So now, between the
parentheses, we're going to go and put
the parameter name. That means in the
function definition, we define the
parameters. So, this is where it goes.
Now, about the function call, we put
there something else, we call it
arguments. We're going to put an
argument value in the function call. So
now, let's say that I would like to
build a function that's going to go and
multiply any value by two. So, how we
going to do it? We're going to call the
function times two. This is the function
name. And now we have to specify a name
for the parameter. So, it could be any
name like, for example, I'm going to go
with the X. And now we're going to write
the function, it's going to go and print
the result of multiplying the parameter
with two. So, X multiplied by two. And
actually, that's it for the definition.
Now, in the function call, we're going
to use again the function name. And now
we have to specify an argument value.
So, as you hear me, I'm saying you
value, so not a name. So, it could be
any value, like for example, let's say
three. As you can see, it is very
simple. The syntax stays the same, but
we just added a parameter in the
definition and our value, the argument,
in the call. So, now once you execute
it, it's going to go line by line. It's
going to start with the def. Python
going to understand, "Okay, this is the
definition of the function." So, it will
not go inside it and do anything.
Instead, it's going to go and create an
object in the memory where it's going to
put the function name, the definition of
the function, and a list of parameters.
So, now since here we have only one
parameter, it's going to be the X. So,
it has no value and the parameter here
is like a placeholder. Nothing inside it
yet. So, that's it. Once it's created,
Python going to go to the next line,
which is the function call. Now, Python
going to see, "Okay, I know this name. I
have it in the memory and now it's time
to execute the function, but first,
there is one step to be done, which is
Python going to go and take the argument
value and it's going to go and assign it
for the parameter. So, if you are
looking at this, this looks exactly like
variables where you have a variable name
and a variable value. So, the name is
here the parameter, the argument here is
the value. So, with that, we just filled
the placeholder with a value. Now, after
the assignment, Python going to go and
start executing the function. It's going
to see the function print and inside it,
it must do the calculation first. So,
it's going to pick the value that is
assigned to the local variable X. Here,
we have it at three and then it's going
to go and multiply it by two. So, we get
have the value six and it's going to go
and print it in the output. So, now once
it's done, it is very important to
understand, it's going to go and destroy
the whole local variable with its value.
So, everything going to be lost and
again, we're going to have an empty
parameter as a placeholder. So, all I
want you to understand from here that
when the function is defined, the
parameter is going to be like a
placeholder. It's going to be empty, no
value inside it and only when the
function is called and executed, Python
going to take the argument value, assign
it to that parameter, so it is filling
the placeholder, and then use the whole
thing as a local variable. And once the
function finishes, everything
disappears. So, this is what happens
behind the scenes once you start using
parameters and arguments. So, just a
quick comparison between the parameters
and the arguments. The parameters are
used in the function definition, the
arguments are used in the function call,
the parameters are the placeholder, and
the arguments are the real value that
going to fill the placeholder. So, a
parameter is only a definition on what a
function expects. So, it defines the
input, and the arguments provides your
actual data that going to go inside the
function. So, it is very simple. All
right, so now let's practice in Python.
Let's say that I have the following
name, and the quality of the name is not
really good. So, we have at the start
some space, and then we have Maria like
this. So, the cases are messed up, and
that ends we have like two spaces. So,
that means the quality of the name is
not really good. I would like now to go
and process the name in order to make it
more clean. Of course, in order to do
that, we're going to use the string
methods. So, the strip going to go and
clean up all those white spaces. Of
course, in order to see the results,
let's go and print it. Now, if you check
the output, you can see we don't have
any more spaces. And the second step we
want to deal with the cases. So, I'm
going to go with the lower case. So,
lower, and then execute. Now, look at
this. The name is processed and clean.
With that, we are doing some data
transformations and clean up. But now,
let's say that in our project, always
the text comes like this. We have
spaces, we have weird cases, and this
rule I'm going to apply it over and
over. So, now instead of repeating the
same steps over and over to say, "Okay,
strip and then lower." What I can do, I
can put this rule, this logic inside the
function. I have it once, and I can use
it whenever I want. So, now let's go and
do it. I usually put the definition at
the start, so I'm going to say def. We
have to define the function and then the
function name. You can call it clean
name, but if you want to make it more
generic, maybe you want to clean as well
the addresses or the countries and stuff
like that, you can say, "Okay, clean
text or string or whatever." But I'm
going to leave it for now for clean
name. And now of course we have to put
the parentheses and then at the end the
double points. So now I'm going to take
the whole thing and put it inside the
function and of course we have to add
the indentations, so the spaces. And
with that we have the definition of the
function. So now what is missing is of
course we have to call the function. So
we're going to say clean name and
actually that's it. So now if you go and
execute it, you're going to get the
exact same result, so you're going to
get Maria where the name is clean. But
of course we have an issue. So now if I
go and just execute the function
multiple times, I'm always transforming
the same value. So we have Maria three
times. But in my project I have
different values and different names,
not only one. So it will not work that
each time I'm going to go and change the
name inside the function. Instead I want
it to be more flexible where each time
I'm going to give it my own value. So
that means my friend we have to change
the shape of this function so that's
data goes in. So how we going to do it?
It is very simple. First we have to
change the definition. So now inside the
parentheses we're going to give the
parameter name and it's going to be just
the name. Now look at this, something
changed already. And now the next step
is that we're going to go and remove
this assignment because the values will
not come from the function itself, it
will come from outside. So that means
I'm going to take the value Maria from
here and put it as an argument for the
function call. So something like this
and then just remove this over here. And
with that we have only one line inside
the definition. So you can see inside
the function there are no values at all.
It's just describing what going to
happen to the parameter. So now let me
just try this out. I'm going to remove
those stuff and then let's go and
execute. Look at this, the result is the
same, but this time the value is coming
from the outside as an arguments, not a
static value inside the function. Now,
let me show you how cool it is. Now, we
can call the function but using
different arguments. So, for example,
let's say we're going to have Kumar
everything with capital letter and at
the end we have one space. Now, let's
clean up this name and execute. Look at
this, again we have the same standards.
So, the white spaces are removed and
everything in lower case. So, as you can
see now my function is more
professional. It is more generic that I
can accept any value. So, it is very
cool and you can keep giving it values
as much as you need. But, now one more
thing, of course, if you execute it
without any argument, you're going to
get an error because the function has a
parameter and it expects an argument.
So, you cannot leave it like this, but
of course, if you don't want to pass any
value, you can pass for it like an
empty. This can still work, but you have
to pass something. So, this is how we
use a parameter and an argument in order
to build an input to our function, which
going to make things more flexible and
professional.
All right, friends. So, now once you
start working with parameters and
functions, you're going to get the
feeling that they look like variables.
So, why do we have like parameters and
what are the differences between them?
Well, I totally understand this topic is
very confusing for beginners because in
Python we usually have like three kinds
of variables. We have parameters,
[music]
local variables, and global variables.
Well, at the end it comes actually to
only two things, how long they live and
who can access them. So, now of course,
as usual, I'm going to show you in
details using animated sketches the
differences between them. So, let's dive
in. Okay, now by looking back to our
very simple function where we are
multiplying things by two. So, it accept
an input, then multiply it by two and
print it out. So, now the X here, the
input, it is our parameter. So, nothing
new so far. Now, let's extend it by
adding [music] a new variable completely
outside the function. So, for example,
the f it is equal to two. Now, since
this is outside of our function, we call
it a global variable. A global variable
it is a variable that is created outside
the function and available everywhere to
be accessed throughout the program. So,
that means actually inside the function
I can access this variable and I can
say, "Okay, multiply the parameter by
the variable f instead of two so that I
am flexible on how to multiply." And I
can call the function multiply by
factor. So, this is a second type of
variable. Now, coming to the third one,
we can go inside the function and create
inside it a new variable. So, we can say
the variable y going to hold the final
result of our calculation and then at
the end we're going to print the y. So,
now, since this variable is inside the
function, we call it a local variable.
So, a local variable it is created
inside the function and here the big
difference it is only available for this
function, not globally for everything
else. So, those are the three different
types of variables, but of course, in
order to understand it, let's see what
can happen behind the scenes once you
execute it. So, now, as usual, Python
going to go step-by-step from the top to
the bottom. So, now, the first line it's
going to go and create in the memory a
variable called the f and going to
assign for it a value two. So, at this
[music] point, the variable exist and
available to be used. Now, it's going to
go to the second line where it's going
to see def. So, Python going to
understand, "Okay, I'm going to go and
create in the memory an object called
function. It has a name, so multiply by
factor and inside it it's going to go
and put the body, the function code, and
then a list of parameters since we have
only one. Then, we're going to have only
the x but without any value yet. So, we
have only the name of the parameter and
now comes something very important, the
local variable y is not created yet. And
that's because as we learned in the
definition of the function, Python will
not go inside the body and start
executing its code. And of course,
without executing, Python will not know
about the local variable. All what
Python knows is we have a global
variable the F and its value two. We
have a parameter called X, but we don't
know yet its value, and it knows nothing
about the local variables. So now, once
it's created, Python going to go to the
next line, and here we have the function
call with an argument value three. So
now, what's going to happen first,
Python going to take the argument value
the three and assign it to the
parameter. Now, Python knows its value,
X is equal to three, and then it can go
to the next step and start executing the
body. So now, the next step is going to
see the Y and the calculation. So first,
it's going to execute the right side, so
it's going to go and get the value of
the X. This example is going to be the
three, and then it needs the value of
the F. So it's going to go and access
the global variable and get the two. So
with that, we have the three and the
two, it's going to go and multiply it.
And now, Python have Y is equal to six.
[music] And only at this moment, Python
going to go and create a new variable
called Y, but this variable is a local
one, and it's going to assign for it the
value six. So with that it's done, it's
going to go to the next step where it's
going to go and print the Y. So it's
going to access [music] the local
variable, take its value, and print it
in the output. So that Python is done
executing the body of the function, and
now comes something very critical to
understand. Python going to go and
remove the argument from the parameter.
So our parameter going to go again as an
empty placeholder, but of course, it
will not destroy the parameter itself.
It is just unassigning the value. And
the second step, it's going to go and
destroy the local variable Y. Not only
its value, the whole thing, the variable
name and as well its value. So by the
end, this variable is totally
unavailable and we has no idea about it.
So at this point, we are back to the
first point. Python knows there is a
global variable, it knows there is a
parameter called X, and it has no idea
about the local variable Y because it
destroyed it. So, now by looking through
this you can understand exactly the
lifetime of each of those variables. The
global variable of the F has the longest
life. It going to be created at the
start of the program and it going to
lives as long as the program runs. Once
the program ends, Python going to go and
destroy the global variable. The local
variable has the shortest life. So, it
going to be created when the function
runs and it's going to be destroyed
after the function ends. So, it is
totally temporary. Same things for the
parameter. Its value going to live as
long as the function is running. The
second point that it is very critical to
understand is how those stuff are
accessed. Now, about the global
parameter, you can access it anywhere.
In our example, inside the function we
accessed the global variable and as well
outside the function. Like for example,
if you say print F, you will not get any
errors and you can access its value. But
now for the parameters and the local
variables, it is totally different. You
can use them only inside the function
and not outside. Like for example, here
inside it was totally okay. So, we used
the parameter X in the calculation. We
printed the Y. Everything is happening
inside the function. But now once you go
outside, whether before or after you say
print Y, Python will not understand what
you are talking about because in the
memory there is no object called Y. Same
thing goes for the parameter. You going
to get an error if you do that outside
the function because Python sees only
the object F and the function object. Of
course, you cannot use its parameter
without calling it first. So, let's
recap. The global variable, they have
long life. So, they will be created at
the start and destroyed by the end of
the whole program and they can be
accessed everywhere, whether inside the
function, outside, wherever you want.
But the local variables and the
parameters, they have short life. They
only live during the execution of the
function and they can only access the
inside the function, not outside. Uh
those are exactly the differences
between them. All right, now back to our
example in order to practice, and if you
look to this, we have one thing. We have
only the parameter. So, now let's go and
add more stuff, like for example, a
local variable. So, we're going to go
inside the function and create something
called cleans. And now we're going to go
and put the whole thing, the whole
modifications of the parameter, and the
output of the methods going to be stored
inside our local variable. So, now
actually this is as well best practices
on how to do this function, because here
things are more clear for you. Like for
example, usually the parameter holds the
raw data. So, this is the input, then we
are going to modify the raw data, and
then store the processed data inside a
new variable. So, that you can
understand immediately, okay, the raw
data inside the name, and the processed
data inside a new local variable called
cleans. This is very logical and easier
for you to understand the purpose of the
function. And with that actually, you
have now the two versions of the data,
the raw data and the processed data. So,
this is clearly a big win for you if you
introduce the local variable. And now
what we're going to do, we want of
course to print the local variable, the
new processed value, cleans. So, again,
the parameter is defined here, and here
we have a local variable. So, now before
I execute, I will just remove this over
here, and then let's go and run it. As
you can see, we're going to get the same
results. So, this going to work as long
as you are inside the function. So,
actually you can go and as well print
the parameter name. We're going to say
raw double points, and then the name.
And from here, we're going to say cleans
double points, and then we can execute.
So, by introducing the local variable,
now I am able to access the old value
and as well the clean value. So, now of
course this is going to work as long as
you are inside the function. So, for
example, if I take the parameter and
just print it outside, and then execute,
Python going to say, "What are you
talking about? There is nothing called
name." Same thing goes for the cleaned.
So, if I go over here and execute it,
it's going to say, "I don't know what
you are talking about." So, whether you
put it before or after, it will not
work. So, parameter local variables only
inside the function. And now let's go
and introduce a global variable. Now,
I'm going to make it a little bit
interesting where you're going to say,
"You know what? I'm going to control
whether we lower the case or not using a
global variable." So, in our project,
we're going to say, "You know what? The
case rule going to be lower." So, it is
just like a global variable. So, this is
global variable. And only if it is lower
than the function must lower the case.
So, with that, I'm creating like a
logic. I need to build like a condition.
And for that, of course, we can go and
use the if statement. So, now we're
going to go and access the global
variable, case rule. If this is equal to
lower, only then go and apply the method
lower. So, I will not go and apply it
right away. What you're going to do,
we're going to say cleaned going to be
cleaned. lower. Otherwise, if the
function is not lower, then don't go and
apply it. So, it is very simple. Now,
we'll just go and remove this print over
here. And of course, we can go and try
this out. Now, look at this. We have
Maria and everything is lowered. So, now
let's say that the rule is now do
nothing. So, n a. You don't have to
lower any case. So, now if you go and
execute it, you can see the cases is
like the original. So, that means the
method lower is not applied because the
rule says something else. So, my
friends, as you can see, we are able to
access the global variable inside the
function. And as well, we can access it
outside. So, we can say the rule is
double points. And then, the case rule.
So, this is very classical one. You can
see it's going to work. So, inside and
outside. But, the parameter and the
local variables, this is something very
specific. And we can access it only
inside the function. So, my friends, as
you can see again, it's very simple.
Those are the three different types of
variables.
All right, friends. So, now so far we
just talked about only one input, one
parameter. This is something rarely
happen in real code. Instead, we usually
like send a lot of data to functions.
So, that's means we need multiple
parameters and multiple arguments. And
here it's going to be tricky about the
order of the arguments. So, now let's
see how we're going to do that. Okay, so
now back to our example where we have
only one input, one parameter. And now
I'm going to go and extend it where
we're going to say, "You know what? I'm
going to send both the first name and
the last name to be cleaned. And maybe
at the end it should be merged in a full
name." So, there will be multiple steps.
That means we need two informations goes
inside the function. We have to change
it the definition. Not only the first
name, but also the last name. I'm just
going to make the underscore. So, now my
function accepts two parameters, two
values. And of course we have to do
something with those two values. So, the
first one I'm going to call it just
first and then first name. And I'm going
to do the same steps for the last name.
So, last name dot strip and we're going
to lower the cases as well. And then the
last step we're going to say full name
equal first plus and maybe we're going
to add some space to look nicer. And
then last. And at the end we're going to
go and print the full name, right? So,
actually that's it. This is the
definition. We accept two values, first
name and last name. We're going to go
and clean them up, then combine them
together and print it in the output. So,
that's all about the definition. Now, if
you leave everything like this and
execute, you're going to get an error
because Python going to say, "You know
what? You have here two parameters. You
have to pass for me as well two values."
So, is Maria now for the first name, the
last name, it will not work. That's why
as well you have to pass multiple
arguments. So, in the function call you
have to say, "Okay, Maria." And then
comma. It's like the parameters. So, you
just make a list of values. And maybe
Smith and then space. So now let's go
and try this out. Look at this. Now we
have the full name Maria Smith,
everything lowercased. There is no
spaces or whatever and they are combined
together. So you can keep extending your
function and sending more data. Like for
example, I'm going to say here the
country and maybe the country I will not
edit it at all. I will just print it at
the output. I'm going to say from and
then country. And now in order to pass
for this the value, of course, I have to
extend it and maybe DE. So now if I go
and execute it, it's going to say Maria
Smith from DE, Germany. So as you can
see, it is very simple to extend. All
right. So now the next thing we're going
to start talking about the arguments
because in Python we have like two
different ways on how to send the values
to the function. Those ways has some
fancy names like we have the positional
arguments and the keyword arguments. So
the positional arguments are values
passed to the function based on their
order and the keyword arguments are
values that are passed to the function
by the name of the parameter. They might
sound very similar, but actually they
have a different behavior. So now let's
check the positional arguments.
Actually, we already using it. So if you
think about the syntax, this is a
positional arguments. It's all about how
Python is mapping those values to the
parameters. So we are saying the first
value is actually for the first
parameter, the second argument for the
second parameter, the third for the
third. This is what we mean with the
positional arguments. So that means the
order of the values over here is really
important. And this is of course very
scary because if you go and like make
something wrong, we all do mistakes. So
if you put the country first, then first
name, last name and then you go and
execute it, you will not get an error,
but your data will make no sense. The
Maria from Smith. Well, maybe the first
part makes sense, but the whole thing is
messed up because Python does not care
whether the data is correct or not. It
just going to go blindly and trust your
order. So the first for the first, the
second for second and so on. That's why
it is risky, but there's another way on
how to do this by using the name of the
parameters in the call. So, let me show
you what I mean. Now, we're going to use
the name of the parameter first name,
then equal, and then the first name.
It's like you're creating variables and
assigning to it values. So, you're going
to keep repeating the same things. Last
name equal than Smith. Let me just make
it smaller, and then country equal to
DE. Now, if you go and execute it, you
will get the exact same results. Maria
Smith from DE. So, actually, that's it.
This is the syntax of the keyword
arguments. Now, of course, the
interesting part, if you go and do
mistakes and you put the country at the
start, and then you go and execute, then
everything going to be fine. Because now
Python knows which value belongs to
which parameter, even if the order makes
no sense. It knows, okay, DE for the
parameter country, and it's going to go
and assign it really to the country. So,
if you messed up with the order, then
it's going to be fine. And this is a
very big advantage for the keyword
arguments. As you can see, this is
another way on how to pass the values to
the function. Now, if you think about
the readability and understanding, of
course, the keyword arguments going to
win. Because it is really easier for us
to understand which value belong to
which parameter. It is really clear, DE
is a country, first name Maria, last
name Smith. But if you go over here, you
have always to keep your eye on the
definition. So, you're going to say,
okay, of course, here it is wrong. Let
me just make it correct. So, you're
going to keep mapping in your eye, okay,
the the first value is the first name,
the second is last name. It is not that
easy to read. So, the keywords for the
readability, it wins, as well for the
safety. So, of course, if you have a lot
of parameters, we are all humans, we're
going to make mistakes. It's going to be
more safe if you use the keyword
arguments. But here we come to the
annoying point about the keyword
arguments. It is way more efforts to
write it. So, I have to keep writing the
parameter names each time I'm writing
the call. And of course, the maintaining
going to be really bad if you go and
change things like in the definition.
You say, you know what? I will just
remove the name. I will make it only
first. So, I'm changing the name of the
parameter. I changed my mind. So, now
not only I have to change things inside
the function, I have to go for each call
and start as well renaming the
parameter. This is a lot of efforts. And
now, of course, you might ask me, which
one should I use, positional or keyword?
Well, this really depends on the number
of the parameters. The rule says like
between two and three parameters it is
totally fine to use the positional
arguments because you can manage it.
It's only three and I hope you will not
make mistakes. But if you have more than
two or three, then you should go with
the keyword arguments. It is just more
safe because things can go out of your
hands and you will not be able always to
maintain the correct order for the
arguments. So, if you have one two
parameters, go with the positional. More
than that, go with the keyword
arguments.
And now to the next point, actually, we
can go and mix things. So, you can go
and use both of them in one call. So, we
call it the mixed arguments.
Now, how we going to do it? We can say
clean name. Now, the first one going to
be the positional argument, so it's
going to be Maria. But let's make it
like with spaces and stuff. And then it
is followed by a keyword arguments. So,
here going to be the last name, going to
be Smith, and then the country.
So, now if you go and execute it, you
will not get any issues and it's going
to work. So, actually, you can go and
mix it, but there is like rules to do
that. So, the rule says you cannot start
with the keyword arguments. So, for
example, I cannot go and say, you know
what, first name equal, and then
followed by a positional arguments. So,
without any name for the parameter. If I
go and execute it, I'm going to get an
issue. It says, positional argument
follows keyword arguments. So, this is
the rule. You have always to start with
a positional argument and then the
keyword arguments. And of course, you
cannot go and alternate between them.
So, you start with positional key, and
then the last one you say, "Okay, go
back to the positional." You will get an
error. So, the rule is very strict. And
of course, you can go and start with two
positional arguments and only the last
one it is keywords. So, this is of
course totally fine. Now, you might tell
me, "But why we should do this? Why
should mix the arguments?" Well, the
main reason why you would do this it is
just like styling thing. The thing is,
if you have a lot of values, sometimes
we have like primary values, the most
important one and then we have like
secondary values that are helping the
context. If I look to this example, I'm
going to say, "You know what? The first
name and the last name, those are the
primary values. So, this is the identity
of the person and the most important
thing in let's say the function." But
the country it is something like
secondary. It is like a context, extra
details about the person. So, for
example, if you have like a phone number
or an email, all those informations are
secondary to the main important
information, the first and last name.
So, it's just like styling thing, a
luxury thing to understand what is
primary and what is secondary. But from
my point of view, I would not go with
this mixing because it might confuse
later as you like change things. Either
go with the positional and the keywords
and I told you about the rule. Two
parameters, go with the positional, more
than that, go with the keywords. If you
want to do things more fancy, then maybe
try the mixed, but I don't recommend
you.
So, now my friends, as you see all the
parameters that we used so far, they all
require the value and if you don't
specify value for it, the code going to
break. But the thing is, in a real
project this will not work because
sometimes we have parameters that are
not that important or let's say we don't
have a value for it. That's why in
Python we have something called a
default parameter. A default parameter
is a parameter that has only a value. If
you don't pass for it an argument, a
value, Python going to go and use this
default value and this going to make our
parameter optional. So, it is totally
okay if I don't pass for it any
argument, any value. So, let's see how
this works. So, now by looking to our
example, what could happen is that you
have some registration form and you have
some optional fields like, for example,
the country information. It's totally up
for the user whether they enter their
country or not. And if they don't enter
the country, the code the program should
not break. So, that means we have to go
and add a default value in case we don't
have in the code the country and we can
do that in the function definition. So,
what we're going to do we're going to go
to the parameter over here and add for
it a value. Not only the parameter name,
but as well a default value like, for
example, in a not available. So, that
means my friend it is very simple. If
you see a value inside of the
definition, then this value is actually
the default. So, now if I go and execute
it, as you can see, we have always at
the end the because in all of those
calls I'm specifying the value of the
country. So, that means it is
unnecessary for Python to go and use the
default. But now if I go and say, I'm
going to call it here default and I'm
going to say here clean name, specify
the first value, maybe Kumar and Suresh.
Now, the last thing, the country, I will
leave it empty. So, I hope this is the
correct order. But now I will not give
the value for the country. So, I'm
passing here two values, but we have
three arguments. But again, this is
totally fine because we have a backup.
We have a default value for the country.
Now, if we go and execute it, as you can
see, we're going to get Kumar, Suresh
from NA. So, this time we didn't get any
syntax error because Python has a
backup. It has the default value to be
used. So, actually, it is very simple.
Now, of course, things going to get
confusing if you do this like, for
example, you go and remove the default
from the country and you give a default
for the last name. Like, for example,
I'm going to say, if we don't have a
last name, then NA. Now, if you leave it
like this and then you go and execute,
it will not work because it says,
"Parameter without a default follows a
parameter with a default." So, actually,
you have to pay attention for the
parameters. First, you have to list all
the parameters without a default value,
and only after that, you list the
parameters with a default. So, that
means you cannot mix it like this. I
have as well to go and now add a default
for the country. Otherwise, of course,
Python will not understand how to map
all those things. Now, if I go and
execute it, I'm going to get the same
results. And now, even if I don't have
the last name, and then execute, Kumar
in A from N/A. So, this is totally okay.
So, that's it, actually. This is what we
mean with the default parameter.
All right. So, now we got to talk about
something that is a little bit more
advanced. So far, we defined exactly the
number of inputs for our function. But,
there are some scenarios where we don't
know in advance how many values we're
going to pass to the function. And
exactly for that, in Python, we have two
tools. We [music] have the star args and
the double star kwargs keyword args. So,
what this means? So, the star or the
double star args, they're going to allow
our function to accept any number of
arguments. That means it's going to make
it totally flexible. We can send for it
one value, two values, three values. So,
now, since we have those two types,
positional and keyword arguments, that's
why we have the one star args for the
positional arguments and the two star
kwargs for the keyword arguments. So,
now, let's have a very simple example to
understand how this works. So, now,
let's say that I would like to make a
function that calculates the total of
multiple values. So, we're going to make
a function called total, and let's say
that I want to pass for it two values.
So, I'm going to go and define two
parameters for that, and then I'm going
to say print A plus B. And actually,
that's it. So, let's go and call it
total, and let's pass the two values,
one and two. So, now, if you go and
execute it, it is very simple. It is
just adding the values. But, now, let's
say that I would like to go now and add
three values, one, two, and three. Now,
since I have three values, I have to go
and extend my function and add for it
another parameter C. And then, as we'll
go over here and say plus C, and then go
and execute. Of course, we're going to
get an error because the first call will
not work. That's because we have here
only two values. And now, in order to
make this works, we have to go and add a
default value for each parameter. So, if
there is no any value, it's going to be
zero. Same things for the first one. And
let's go and put everything with the
defaults. Now, if I go and execute, it's
going to work. So, for the first call,
it's going to be three, and the second
one is going to be six. Now, guess what?
We're going to go and add another value.
One, two, three, four. Now, things will
be really annoying because I'm going to
go and keep adding for each value a
parameter and as well a default value.
As you can see, this is not really
smart. We don't know exactly what going
to happen next. Are we going to get like
five values, 10 values? Are we going to
go and guess the number of parameters
here? So, now, in order to solve this
scenario, we have actually two options.
The first one, we can go actually and
pass a list. So, instead of having like
separate arguments, we're going to send
only one argument, one value, a list.
And then, we're going to do the sum
operator inside the function. But, of
course, this going to feel heavier
because you have to go and create a list
and stuff like that. That's why we have
a second option where we're going to use
the star or the double star args. Now,
let's see how we can do that. The syntax
for that is very simple. Now, instead of
having all those parameters in the
definition, we're going to go and remove
them. And this time, I'm going to say
star and then args. And with that, I'm
telling Python, you need to accept any
number of arguments. Of course, we have
to talk about the definition of the
function. We don't need all those stuff,
the parameters. We don't have them. Now,
we have only one thing called args. So,
what is actually args? We can go and
check that. So, if you go and say type
and then say args, let's go and execute
it and check the type. As you can see,
it is the class tuple. So, that means my
friends, Python is collecting the
different values inside the data type
tuple. And now we can use any function
or methods on this tuple like we learned
before. So, what we're going to do
actually, we want to summarize all those
values. We're going to use the function
sum and we're going to pass for it our
tuple. It is very easy, right? Let's go
and try this out and execute. Look at
this. We are getting exactly the same
results. So, it looks clean and as well,
we can go and pass for it any number of
arguments. So, I can go and say 1 2 3 4
5 6. And if I go and execute, it's going
to work without me going and extending
the parameters. So, my friends, it is
totally flexible and as well clean. So,
now we have to understand one thing,
when to use the one star args, if the
values that you are passing to our
function has always the same type of
information. Like here we have a list of
numbers. So, all of them are numbers or
maybe we have like multiple characters,
multiple string values, then we can go
and use the one star args. But if things
gets more complicated, where we have
multiple type of informations that we
want to send to the function. And for
this scenario, the one star args will
not be enough. We have to go and use the
two star args. So, have an example to
understand what this means. So, now
let's say that we are building a
function that creates a user profile.
So, we're going to go and define for
example a function called create user.
And now, of course, here comes the
magic. If you want to have things
flexible and you accept any type of
information to your function, then we're
going to go and use the double stars and
then say kwargs. Then of course, double
point and here we will not go and create
anything. We're going to go and just
print it. So, we're going to go and
print the kwargs. So, this is the
definition of the function. I'm just
recording this again because some audio
issues. Now, of course, the first step
is that we're going to go and call the
function. So, it's going to be create
user. And now, of course, we have to
pass the arguments, but it should be a
keywords arguments. So, that means key
values. Like for example, this I'm going
to say first name equal like for
example, Mo. And let's have a last name
like Salah. He's just the best, right?
Now, his age I believe 33, right? And of
course, depend on the recording time.
And the country going to be Egypt.
So now, those are the information about
our user. As you can see, we have
different things. We have names, we have
age with number, we have the country.
And what going to happen now, we're
going to go and send everything, the
whole thing to our function. But now,
before we execute the whole thing, I
would like to see the data type of the
quarks. Is it a tuple? I don't think so.
So, let's go and print
type the quarks.
Now, let's go and execute the whole
thing. Now, look at this. The data type
of the quarks is not a tuple, it is a
dictionary. And this of course makes
sense because we are using the keywords
arguments. And this is key value pairs,
right? And it is the only data type that
can hold those informations. And now, as
we are printing, as you can see, we are
getting the whole dictionary. So now,
this is one user. Of course, we can go
and call it again, but we can use
completely different setup. Like for
example, instead of saying the first
name, we can go and use a name. And this
time going to say Ronaldo. And then we
will not use any last name. We're going
to go and have only the country. So,
Portugal.
So, we don't have the age, we don't have
the last name. And it is only two key
arguments. So, if you go and execute it,
it going to be totally fine. Python
going to go and collect those two, put
it in a dictionary, and then print the
whole thing in the outputs. And of
course, you can use the quarks only if
you are using keyword arguments. So, for
example, if I go over here and just
remove the whole thing, so I have here
positional argument and execute, I'm
going to get an error. So, this will not
work. So, actually that's it. It's very
simple. This is how the double star
quarks works. So, now let's go and recap
and compare them side by side. The one
star arcs accepts multiple positional
arguments and the two star arcs accepts
multiple keyword arguments. So, you have
to include as well the name of the
values. We use the one star arcs if you
are passing the same kind of
informations. So, we are there sending
numbers or we are sending string values.
But if you want to mix them and send
multiple piece of informations, then we
use the double star quarks. And now
about how Python stores those
informations, the one star arcs stores
the data inside a tuple and the two star
arcs are stored as a dictionary because
it has to store the key value pairs. So,
actually that's it. This is for those
two tools. It is not that hard.
Now, so far all what we have talked
about is how the data going to go in
inside our function using the parameters
and arguments. So, this is actually one
shape of the functions, but of course we
can go and extend it where we build an
output from the function. So, the data
goes out, goes outside the function. And
of course we can do that using the
keyword return in order to return
something back to our program. So, now
by looking to this, this is the most
famous shape of functions. We call it
the transformation function because it
works like this. We send the raw values
to the function. So, data goes in, then
something going to happen to the data.
So, the data going to be transformed to
a different shape and then this data
going to comes out and return back to
the program in order to do something
else with it. So, it sounds very simple
and most of our functions looks like
this. Now, if you look back to our
example, you can see actually we are
just printing the output of the
function. And of course, printing it is
something for us, for human. We are
seeing the text in the screen. But the
thing is programs don't work with the
printed outputs. They need the function
to return the values back to it
internally. And for that, we have the
return. So, that means if you want the
result of your function to be reused
later in the program, you cannot use
print. Instead, you have to use return.
And of course, you can use both of them
if you want to print something for you
and return something back to the
program. So now, of course, let's have a
look to the syntax. Now, we have to
change both of the components, the
definition and the calls. So now, for
the definition, we're going to go to the
end of the function and we're going to
add the keyword return. And after that,
very important, you have to add
something. You have to tell Python what
to return. You cannot leave it empty.
So, it could be anything, a value, a
local variable, a parameter,
calculation, logic, or maybe calling
another function. So, anything after the
return is going to be okay. So now, by
looking back to our example, I'm going
to go and remove the print and instead,
we're going to put a return. And what we
are returning here is the local
variable, the final result of the
calculation. Return Y. Now, about the
call, we cannot just go and call the
function and walk away. We have to store
the returned value somehow, right? And
of course, for that, we usually use
variables, then assign for it the
function call. So now, whatever the
function returns back is going to be
stored inside this variable. And of
course, this is amazing because now we
can go and do something for this output,
like maybe go printing it or do
something else. So now, let's understand
how this is going to be executed behind
the scenes. So as usual, Python is going
to execute it from the start. It's going
to go and define the function without
executing it by creating the object
function in the memory, where we have
inside the name, the body, parameters.
So, that's it for the definition. Then
Python is going to go to the next line,
where we have the global variable and
the call. Now, since we don't have the
value yet, Python is going to go and
execute the right side. So, it's going
to go and execute the call by first
assigning the argument to the parameter,
and then it's going to go inside the
body and start executing it step by
step. Here we have a local variable and
an expression. So, it's going to go and
grab the parameter value, multiply it by
two, we're going to get six. And now,
Python going to go and create a local
variable Y and assign for it the value
six. Then, Python going to go to the
next line, and here it can see a return.
And after that, we have the variable. So
now, Python going to go and grab the
value of the local variable Y, so the
six, and then it's going to send it
back. It's going to return it back to
the caller. So, that we have Z is equal
to six. But of course, before doing
anything else, it's going to go and
clean up. It's going to go and destroy
the local variable and assign the
parameter. Now, we have everything, and
with that, Python going to go and create
the global variable the Z and assign for
it the value six. And now, we can reuse
it as we want. So, for example, we go
and print it. It's going to grab the
value from the memory and put it in the
output. So now, my friends, as you can
see, you have now the full big picture
on how everything works together. The
input, the arguments, the local
variables, the global variables, the
output, the return, and it's pretty
easy, right? So, everything makes sense.
But there is one small thing before we
go to practice. Actually, in Python, if
you don't specify a return, still Python
going to send something back to the
program, by the way. And you might say,
"What are you talking about?" Well, it's
going to send something called none. And
of course, none it's not a real value.
It's something unknown, missing. It's
not a useful information, but still it
is an indicator that the function is not
returning a real value. And this is
something, of course, we can use. So, if
you are not defining a return, Python
going to send a none, but if you use a
return, it's going to send a useful
information back. Okay, so now of
course, let's go and practice. Okay, so
now by looking back to our example where
we are sending a raw data, the raw name,
and then we are cleaning up the name by
removing the spaces and as well making
the case lower. But now the thing is I'm
just printing the value in the output
and that's it. And this is not something
that we usually do in projects. Usually
we do a step, we cleaned up the name in
order to use it in the next steps inside
my code. So by leaving it like this, I'm
losing this cleaned value in my program.
So that means we have to return this
value. So our example is more realistic.
At the end we're going to go and say,
you know what, go and return the local
variable that holds that cleaned value.
So I'll go and remove the print. I don't
need that. If I leave it like this and
execute, nothing going to happen.
Everything is lost. The program is not
getting the returned value and we as a
human, I'm not seeing what is going on
the output. So of course in order to
capture the return, we have to go and
add a global variable. So let's go and
add a variable called clean name equal
and then assign for it the whole call.
Now let's go and execute it. Of course
we are not seeing anything because we
are not printing, but at least my
program is getting something back. Now
I'm going to go and print our new global
variable. So that clean name, as you can
see we are getting Maria. So not only me
I'm seeing the value and as well my
program is storing the output of this
function. So actually that's it. I'm
really happy about the example. Now it
looks perfect. Data goes in, we do
transformations and then we return the
data back. Now I would like you to test
something. Like for example, I will
remove the return. So my function is not
returning anything but still I'm trying
to catch something from our function. So
if I go and execute it, as you can see
we are getting none. So if you are not
using a return, Python going to send the
none, it means nothing, back to the
caller and then it going to go and
assign it of course for the variable. So
that you can see none. All right. Now
next one more scenario about the return.
Actually we can go and use multiple
returns inside the function definition.
So let's have an example. You remember
if I go and remove everything here from
the arguments and say I would like to
send an empty string. Now, if I go and
execute it, what going to happen? I will
not see anything in the outputs because
it is an empty string. But now, dealing
with empty string it is something really
annoying. We usually convert the empty
string to a none because it is easier to
handle and it makes everything more
clean. So, what I'm going to say, I'm
going to extend the logic and say if the
name contains an empty string, then
replace and return a none. Otherwise, if
you have a real value, then go and do
all those steps. That means there is
like a logic, there is a conditions,
right? Let me show you how we can do it.
So, we can say if and then say not name.
So, if there is something wrong with the
name, it's not real value. Like here,
what going to happen? Don't do anything,
just return a none. So, that means I'm
not returning the value empty string,
I'm just returning none. Otherwise, if
we have a real value, then actually do
the whole steps. So, I'm going to go
over and say else. And of course, we're
going to put the whole logic inside it.
So, make sure you are working correctly
with the indentations. And with that,
look at this, we have twice the return.
But since we have an if else, Python
going to execute only one of them. So,
now let's try this out with this empty
string and go and execute it. Look at
this, in the output we are getting none.
So, that means the if statement is
activated. We fulfilled the condition of
the if statement and it is returning the
none. So, we are not returning the name
or the variable. Now, if I go and say
Maria like this and then execute, it is
not fulfilling the condition because it
has a real string value and it is going
to the else. So, it is processing the
name and returning the processed name.
So, that's it about using more than one
return. Now, there is another thing,
here we are returning only one value.
But actually, we can go and return
multiple values. So, let's have the
following example. I'm going to go and
get rid of the conditional statements
and then we will have this codes. Now,
in this example, we are always switching
the names to lowercase. Now, what could
happen at that? I would like to see my
value in both lower and as well upper
case. So, that means my function should
now return the same value twice, one
with the lower and one with the upper.
So, how we going to do it? I'm going to
go over here and say, "Okay, this is the
lower and now I'm going to go for the
upper cleaned equal and I either keep
working on the original value and say,
"You know what? We're going to strip it
again and say here an upper." Or you can
go and take the lower and switch it to
an upper. So, this is the transformation
and with that I have two local
variables. Of course, I have to go and
now return them. So, I'm going to say
lower cleaned. This is for the first
value and then in order to put another
value, as usual, we use the comma
cleaned. So, that's it. I'm returning
now multiple values back to the caller.
Now, the caller should be responsible
and as well receive both of them. If I
leave it like this and execute, I'm
getting in the output now a tuple of
both of the values. Of course, you can
go and check the data type of the
returned value. So, this is a tuple, but
if you'd like to get like the returned
values in two separate variables, all
what you have to do is to make as well a
list of global variables. So, the first
one I'm going to say lower name and the
second can be upper name. So, with that
I will capture both of them and of
course, I can go and print both of them
as well. So, lower name and upper name.
So, that's it. Let's go and execute.
Look at this. I have two values. They
are not in the tuple anymore. They are
just normal string values inside my two
variables. So, this is how you return
multiple values in one go back to the
caller.
>> [music]
>> So, my friends, as you can see, we have
different shapes of functions for
different purposes and you can see how
the data flows inside the functions. So,
that it goes in, maybe goes out and of
course, this depends on the scenario. So
again, by looking to this, we could have
a function that is just a block of code,
nothing goes in, nothing goes out, or we
could have a function that takes one
input using the parameter and the
argument, or another shape where you
have a function that as well has an
output. So it is returning something
back to the program. That means data
goes out. As well, we can have like
multiple outputs. So we are returning
multiple values back to the program. So
my friends, you have full control on how
to design your function by using the
parameters, arguments, and return. So
you have the full control on how the
data going to flow inside your function.
So now, so far we have learned all the
different types of Python function, but
based on how the data flow through the
function. But now, in real projects, we
categorize and classify the functions by
something else, by the purpose. We
classify them based on the job each
function is responsible for. So now,
what we're going to do, I'm going to
show you some famous patterns and
function types based on their purpose
and their use case. So now, let's go.
All right, the first type is [music] the
action functions. It is a function that
does something in the system instead of
returning a value. So action functions,
they are actually focused on a side
effects. They change something outside
the function. Like for example, example,
a function that is printing something on
the screen, or very famous one in data
engineering where it saves data to a
file or to a database, or you might have
function that is actually sending emails
and notifications if something goes
wrong. And another one could be maybe
calling an external API. So as you can
see, all those action functions, they
don't deal with values and data, but
their job is to do something outside the
function as a side effects. But
sometimes different developers in
different projects use different names
like side effect function, command
function, handler, service function. All
are different names, but for the same
idea. So now let's have a very simple
example. Let's say that we want to store
the application log messages in a file
so that every time an event or something
happens, we going to record it and store
it inside the file. Of course, we didn't
talk about how to deal with files inside
Python, but this is very simple one. So
just follow me step by step, it's going
to be easy. Okay, so now let's see how
we're going to solve it. We start with
the def as usual and then the function
name, we're going to call it right log.
And now for the input, the parameter
going to be the message, so we need it
in order to store it inside the file.
Now in order to work with files, we're
going to start with the keyword with. It
going to help us to open a file, use it
and then save it automatically and
safely. So with open and now we're going
to specify the path of the file. Now of
course, depends where you store your
files. I'm going to go and put it like
this. So it's going to be in C and then
backslash. I'm going to put it in main,
then Python and then I'm going to call
the file app.log. So now since we are
using here a lot of backslashes, I'm
going to go at the start and say an R to
tell Python actually this is a string.
This is not a special character
backslash. So it doesn't mean starting a
new line or do something like a special.
It is just part of my path. Now after
that, we're going to say comma and we're
going to tell Python how it going to go
and store the information inside our
file. There are different modes. We're
going to go with the A. So we are
telling Python go and append my messages
to the end of the file. So don't go and
delete anything or update anything. We
always go and add things to the end of
the file. And then we're going to say as
file. So that we can write to the file,
then double points, so a colon, and then
another enter. Make sure the
indentations are correct. Now we are
inside this statement. So now what we're
going to do, we're going to go and write
something to the file, right? So what
we're going to write inside the file is
going to be the messages.
So it's going to be our parameter. And
now since I would like to see each
message in a new line, I'm going to go
and add a plus, and then a new line. So
backslash n. So again, what's going to
happen, Python going to go and create a
file called app.log inside this path.
The mode is append, so it will not
delete the data inside the file. And
then what is the action? We are writing
inside the file by adding the parameter
message into a new line. So actually, it
is very simple. That's it. Now, let's
say our program runs at the start. So
we're going to say the app started. So
this is the first event. Now, what we're
going to do, we're going to go and
execute it. So now if you get it like me
without any errors, that means it was
successful. Of course, I'm not seeing
anything because we are not printing
anything in the output. And in order to
check our results, we're going to go to
our file, right? So I am inside this
folder, and I can see the app.log. Now
let's go and open it using any editor
that you have. Now look at this, inside
it we have our message stored inside the
file. And this is exactly what we
wanted. Now if you go back and then over
the time something else happens, so
we're going to write inside our log,
user logged in.
So this is the second message. I'll just
comment this out. Let's go and execute
it. Now let's recheck our file. Look at
this, we have the second message
appended. So it is something added to
the end of our file, user logged in.
Let's go and add a third one. Of course,
I don't want this to be repeated. Let's
write log
app stopped. So we are at the end of our
program, and then I go and execute it,
and then reopen the file. You can see
the last message, app stopped. So now,
as you can see my friends, it is really
easy now to deal with the logs using
this nice function where it does one
action, it go to my system, open files,
and write the message at the end. That's
why we call it an action function.
[music]
Moving on to another type by purpose, we
have the transformation functions. We
already saw that previously. It is a
function that takes a raw data as an
input, then it does some transformations
and data manipulations on it, and at the
end it returns a new value with a new
shape. And now, of course, about the
transformations, we could do a lot of
things, like calculating new values,
transforming a text or structure,
converting from one format to another,
extracting or reshaping the data. So,
our logic could be anything that's
manipulate our data. So, it's not about
like changing the system or like
interacting with something outside the
function. It's all about changing the
shape of your data. And of course, in
any data projects engineering or
analytics, this is the most important
shape of functions that you have to
learn because it going to contain the
core business logic that can manipulate
the data. And of course, developers in
different projects use different names,
like the data functions, calculation,
utility, mapper. So again, different
names for the same purpose. Okay, so
now, let's have the following task in
order to practice. Our task is to clean
the email addresses and split it into a
structured data. So, that means we have
to return the username and the domain
out of the email. So, let's see how we
going to do it. Of course, as usual, we
start with the definition. The name
going to be clean and split since we are
doing two things, the email.
Now, about the inputs, of course, we
just need only one thing, the email. So,
this is our parameter. Now, let's go
inside. I'm going to say the first thing
that's to go and clean the email. So,
I'm going to put it in a local variable.
And usually, we clean it by removing the
extra spaces and maybe as well by
normalizing the string value to a lower
case. So, just standard things we
already done it before. Now, of course,
our task going to say split it into
username and domain. Just to have an
example, let's say that we have
sarah@gmail.com.
So, that means Sarah is the username and
the gmail.com is the domain. That means
we need two informations and for that,
we're going to have two variables,
username and the domain. Now, how we
going to extract those two informations
from one string? Do you remember? We
used the method split.
So, it is very easy. And of course, you
have to tell Python where exactly it
going to have to be splitted. It going
to be at the @. So, that Python going to
go and extract everything before and
after the @ and return them as two
values. Now, actually, that's it. All
what's left is to go and return them.
So, of course, you can go and return the
username and the domain separately. But
our task says we have to return it as a
data structure. So, that means we have
to put those two variables into one data
structure and you have to decide on
which type. Of course, since we have
here two different type of informations,
we have the username and domain, we're
going to go with that dictionary. So,
it's going to be very simple. We're
going to use the parentheses and we need
key values. So, at the start, we're
going to say username double points,
going to be the username and I would
like to start a new line. The domain
going to be the value from the domain.
Actually, that's it.
We're taking the email address, we are
cleaning it up, we are splitting it into
two informations, and then returning it
as a data structure. Of course, we have
to go and test. So,
we're going to call the function, and
let's have Sarah
gmail.com. And now, of course, if I run
this, I will not get anything in the
output. I would like to see the results.
So, what you can do, we can either
assign it to a global variable or just
go and print it, actually. And that's
it. Let's try this out and execute. Now,
look at this. We are getting our
dictionary. Everything is splitted. But,
I would like to go and test, like for
example, I'm going to go and add here
space and at the end, as well, space.
And maybe write everything in capital
letters and here, as well. So, let's try
this out. As you can see, even if I have
bad data, I'm still getting clean data
in the output. So, it is actually
working. So, as you can see, my friend,
this is a typical transformation
function. It takes data in. So, the
email is the raw data. Then, some
transformation going to happen and data
clean up. So, we are manipulating the
data, and we are returning the result,
the new shape of the data back to our
program.
Okay, now we have a third type of
function. We call it the validation
function. It is a very simple function
that's going to check whether something
is valid or not. And typically, this
type of function going to return a
boolean. So, either true or false. So,
my friends, the validation functions are
actually focused on the rules and the
correctness more than changing anything.
Like, it will not change your data or
your system. So, there is actually no
action. You have a very simple question,
and this function going to answer your
question by either yes or no. And this
is very useful for many scenarios, like
for example, validating the user input,
checking whether the business rules are
correct, verifying the data quality, and
something that I use a lot, we're going
to use it in order to check whether the
user has permissions or not. And my
friends, in real projects, the
validation functions are really
important because usually, the data has
bad data quality, and you're going to
use those functions to protect your
system from bad data. And as a data
engineer, as you build your data
pipeline, you're going to as well write
a lot of validation functions to protect
the data before inserting it. So, this
is something really important and we use
a lot in real projects. Now, about the
names, barely we call them validation
functions, but you might hear of maybe a
checker function, but they are all the
same. Okay, so now let's have this very
simple task to practice. Check whether
the passwords meets the minimum length
of eight characters. So, of course, this
going to be easy as well. We going to
start with def as usual. And now, since
this is a question that we're going to
ask our function, we usually add the
name as a question as well. Valid
passwords. It sounds like question and
it's going to be really easy as well to
understand this is a validation function
by the name. And of course, about the
input, we want to send our password. And
now, we're going to go inside the
function. So, now we have to calculate
the length of our password, and for that
we have our nice function the length. It
is a built-in function, and we pass for
it the password as well.
So, that's it going to return the total
number of characters of our password.
And now, of course, we have to check the
length. That's why we're going to go and
say it should be longer or equal to
eight. This is the minimum length. Now,
of course, this expression like this,
it's going to return either true or
false. So, this is a condition, and
actually, we can return the result of
this condition like this. So, it is very
simple. We are returning the result of
our check. So, actually, that's it. So,
we're going to go and test it. So, is
valid passwords. And I'll just go and
throw any password. So, yeah, 1 2 3 4 5
6. And of course, in order to see the
results, we're going to go and print the
whole call. So, let's go and execute it.
Now, look at this, we are getting false.
We are not fulfilling the requirement
because this is only six characters. So,
now of course, let's try a valid one.
I'm going to go and add 7 8, and then
execute. Look at this, I'm getting true.
So, as you can see my friends, this
function is not transforming anything.
My password going to stay as it is. It
is just answering a very simple
question. Is the password valid or not?
So, the answer going to be always yes or
no, true or false. Okay, so now let's
have another task. It says, check if an
email address has a basic valid format
before we use it. So, this is a very
typical thing that might happen. The
user is just registering and giving us
the email. Sometimes they make mistakes
and we're going to get bad data. So, now
before we start using the emails maybe
to store it or to analyze something, we
have to check is the email valid or not.
And for that, we can write a very nice
function like this. So, now since we are
checking something, we're going to call
it as well as a question. Is valid
email? And of course, what is the input?
It can be the email address. Now, one of
the typical things that might happen
that the user might forget to add the
ads.
This is very critical, of course. So,
we're going to say, is the ads in the
email? So, this is the first condition.
And as well, very important structure is
the dots. So, dot com, dot net and stuff
like that. So, I'm going to say as well
whether the dot is inside the email.
Now, of course, there could be a lot of
scenarios, but this is the basic checks.
So, now we are saying, is at in the
email? Is the dot as well in the email?
If both are true, then of course, we're
going to get true. But if one of them is
false, we will get false because we are
using the and operator in between. So,
now this is our expression. And what is
left, of course, we have to return the
result of our check. So, actually that's
it. Let's go and try this out. So, is
valid? Now, I'm going to write a bad
email like Sarah gmail.com without an
ad. And of course, we have to print. So,
let's try this out. As you can see, we
are getting false. This is not a valid
email. But if I go and add for it,
an ad in between, look at this, I'm
getting true. So, this is a valid email.
We can check another scenario where we
don't have a dot, we are getting false.
So, both of the conditions should be
fulfilled, the dot and the at. And of
course, if we don't have at and dot, we
should get as well false. So, as you can
see, I'm just asking the function over
and over, and all what I'm getting is
yes, no, yes, no. So, this is something
that you're going to do a lot in real
projects where you're going to check the
data before doing anything.
All right, my friends. So, now we're
going to talk about my favorite and the
last type of functions based on the
purpose or the use case. We have the
orchestrator functions. An orchestrator
function is a function that controls the
flow of your program by calling other
mini functions in the correct order. And
that's why we call it an orchestrator
function because it is focused on the
coordination and not about the logic or
calculating the data or changing
anything. Their main job is to connect
everything together and to decide what
is the next step to be executed. That's
why in real projects you're going to
find mostly in those projects like a
little logic that going to decide based
on some condition what is the next step
to be executed, what is the next
function to be called. And this is why I
love those type of functions because
they represent a process, a workflow,
and it makes it really easy to
understand your whole program in a very
high level. So, those are amazing type
of functions and I can tell you, once I
enter a new Python project, I always go
and check the orchestrator functions to
understand the behavior and the steps of
the whole project. Now, of course, about
the names, it could be orchestrator or
workflow functions, controller,
pipeline, coordinator. Again, different
names for the same purpose. All right,
now, in order to practice this type, we
can have a mini project. So, we have the
following requirements. We have to build
an application where you're going to
receive an email from a user. We must
check if it is valid email. If it is not
valid, we have to log the problem in a
file. But, if it is valid, then we have
to clean it and store it in a data
structure. And of course, we have to log
each step of the program. Okay, so now
let's see how we're going to do this
project. We have already solved a lot of
parts like, for example, logging the
messages. We have the validation. We
have the cleaning and splitting. So,
that means we have already some random
function solve part of the puzzle. But,
we have now to put everything together
in a process, in a workflow. So now,
those are the steps. And the first thing
that we have to do is actually, we want
to receive an email from a user. So,
let's say that I'm going to ask the user
in an input to give me the email. So,
I'm going to say the email going to be
equal to the function input. And we're
going to say, "Please enter your email."
So, that's we're going to get the email
from the input and we're going to store
it inside the global variable email.
Now, let's go to the second step. We
must check if it is valid email or not.
So, we already have a function for that,
is valid email. So, what we're going to
do? So, that means we're going to call
the function is valid and we're going to
pass for it our email. Okay, so now this
is the first step. Now, the second step,
it says, "If it is not valid, we have to
log the problem." So, that means there
is some kind of condition that I have to
do first. And if it is fulfilled, then I
have to write a log. Of course, we have
already a function in order to write a
log in a file. But, first we have to
build the condition. So, we're going to
say, "If is valid." So, the same thing.
If it is not valid, that means I have to
go and use the not operator. So, if it
is not true, what's going to happen?
We're going to log the problem. So,
we're going to call the function write
log. And what it needs actually, just a
message. So, I'm going to put the whole
message with the email address as well.
So, I'm going to say an if in order to
combine the message with the variable
email, we're going to say invalid email
received.
Then double points and then after that
double points and of course our
variable.
So, the email. Okay, so now let's go to
the next step. It says if it is valid,
we clean it and store the structured
information. We can say else. And now
we're going to call the transformation
function. So, clean and split the email.
So, we're going to pass for it of course
our email address and actually that's
it. So, this can happen only if the
email is valid. So, as you can see this
is how the two types of functions works
together. First, we validate the email.
So, we are using validation function and
if everything is okay, then we use the
transformation function. Very, very
typical. Now, the last step it says we
have to log everything that is
happening. So, that means we have to log
the start at the end whether it was
successful or not. Now, if you look at
this, we just logged if something goes
wrong, right? But still I would like to
log as well if it [clears throat] went
successful. So, I'm going to say after
cleaning go and write in the log
something like
processed
email and then actually I would like to
print the result of the cleanup. So,
that means I have to store the returned
value from the function in a global
variable like for example clean email
equal. So, I'm assigning the return into
this variable and then I'm going to
print it in the logs. So, I'm going to
say clean email. So, that we have as
well a nice information inside our log
about the processed email. Now, of
course we can go and add some extra
information like for example at the
start we're going to write in the log
like application started
and completely at the end
we're going to say application is or
stopped or ended and it looks now like
workflow, like a process. So, our
application going to start. After that,
we going to get the email from the user.
Well, actually, this is unnecessary. So,
let's remove it. But we going to
validate it over here. If it is not
valid, then we going to write an issue
inside our logs. But if it is a valid
email, so everything is correct, then we
going to process the email where we
going to clean and split, and then we
going to print it as well inside our
log. At the other end, we have a nice
message that everything stops. Now,
let's go and try this out. So, I'm going
to say, let's start with a valid email.
So, sarah@gmail.com.
Everything is correct. Let's go and
execute it. Now, look to our log.
Everything looks nice. So, the app is
started. We processed the email. So, we
have the structure. We have the username
and the domain. Everything was okay. And
then the app stops. So, that I have a
nice protocol of how things worked.
Actually, it looks nice. Now, let's go
and try the invalid email. I'm going to
say, just remove all those informations
and save again because it's going to be
appended. Now, let's go and run it
again. And sarah@gmail.com.
So, we don't have an at. And then
execute. So, if you look to this, we can
see the app started, stopped, but we
received an invalid email. So, actually,
that's it. Our program is ready and
everything is correct. But now you might
say, but wait a second. Where is the
orchestration function? Of course, you
are totally right. All those steps are
actually the preparations for the
orchestration function. Now, look to the
whole code over here. We can see we have
our functions. And now we have the whole
workflow outside the functions in the
body of our program, right? And this is
a process calling the other functions.
Now, what we can do actually, we can put
the whole thing inside a fourth
function. So, here we going to have our
orchestrator
function. And as usual, we going to
start with a def. And then we going to
say process user email.
And now about the input here, we have
like two options. Either we're going to
leave it empty because we are getting
the email from the input, or we take
only this step outside and we send to
this orchestrator the email. So, I'm
going to say I'm going to go with the
second option. I'm going to take this
step completely outside and just put it
here at the end. So, now the
orchestrator going to get an email and
everything else going to go inside the
body of the orchestrator. Let me just
clean up a little bit those comments.
I'm going to put it over here. So, look
at this. This is exactly the purpose of
the orchestrator. It is calling all the
other functions. So, we have here the
write log, is valid email, the
transformation, and it is in the correct
order. So, that means first we have to
validate and then we're going to clean
up if everything is correct. And as
well, it is controlling the flow of the
program. So, it has its own like if else
condition, right? And this is exactly
the purpose of the orchestrator function
to call other things. Now, all what you
have to do in the body of our program is
just calling this one function and it's
going to do the rest. So, we collected
already the email and then we're going
to say process user email and I'm going
to pass for it the input from the user
and that's it. So, now as you can see,
the body of our program has only two
line of codes. Get the data and process
it and everything else are actually
inside functions. So, now of course, you
can go and test those stuff. So, if I
provide clean data,
it's going to work. So, I've again app
started, processed email, and app
stopped. So, my friends, this simple
program is a real world scenario that we
usually do at projects. And as you can
see, this is the mindset. We split the
functions actually by the purpose, by
the use case. Once I start writing a new
function, I will think is it like
transformation, is validation, it an
action? and then after writing many
different functions, we put all the
puzzles together inside one
orchestrator. And with that, now we have
a feeling, a real understanding, how we
use functions in real [music] projects.
All right, friends. So, [music] with
that, you have learned the different
types of functions based on the purpose,
on the use case perspective. And now we
have more understanding on how we use
functions in real projects. So, again,
the first type, the action functions,
they make things happen. So, [music]
they interact with things outside your
program, your system, printing, saving
files, calling an API, or another very
famous form, the transformation
function. They work with your data. So,
they take input in, they change it, and
then they return a new value. Another
use case, we have the validation
function. It checks the rules. So, it's
going to answer your questions with
either yes or no. You're going to use
them a lot in order to protect your
system and to check the quality of your
bad data. And the last one, my favorite
one, the orchestrator function. It's
going to go and connect everything
together by calling other mini functions
in the correct order. And once you
understand those patterns, it's going to
be really easy for you to design your
program, to write the code, and to
maintain it. So, those are the different
types of functions by the purpose.
So, now we're going to start with the
first step where we're going to learn
simple, but yet very powerful rules that
every Python developer should follow
when they are writing functions. The
goal is very simple. We have to write
code that is easy to read and easy to
understand, not only for you, but as
well for your colleagues. Many of those
rules are actually come from the PIP 8.
This is the official style guide for
Python. Just Google it, and you're going
to find there like a lot of rules that
are considered as standards on how to
write clean Python code. Of course, we
will not deep dive into all of them, but
I'm going to show you the most critical
one that if you ignore it, your pull
request in the review can be rejected.
But at the same time, there are rules
that are not written in the official
document, but still it is like common
standards between professional Python
developers. So now,
let's go and dive in. All right,
friends. So now here we have a very
simple example of a function that is
actually working, but not following any
standards. So if this is really bad, the
function accepts two parameters, the
price and the rate, and it does some
calculations in order to find the price
after applying the discount. So now,
what we're going to do, I'm going to
show you how I usually review the code
in my projects, and we going to refactor
this bad function so that we're going to
apply all the standards and the rules
that we usually follow in our
professional projects. So now, usually
the first thing that I look at is the
function name. And here we have few
rules. The first rule says, follow the
naming convention, the snake case, for
the function names, where we use lower
case letters, and we separate them using
underscore. This is the official style
from Python if you are following the PEP
8. So now, by looking to the function
name, as you can see, it is not
following our standards. The D is upper
cased, and as well the P is upper cased.
And the two words actually connected to
each other. There is no separation. So
there is no underscore. Now, in order to
fix it, we can do the following. So
we're going to say, diff, and now
everything is lower cased. So disk
underscore, and then after that we have
the print as well lower cased. So
actually, this is the function name
following the first rule. Now, the
second rule is as well about the naming
of the function. So it says a function
name should clearly describe what the
function does. So, we usually start with
a verb in the function name because
usually our functions are actions and it
does something. And always use clear
names and avoid abbreviations. So now,
by looking back to our name, disk_print,
it doesn't say anything, right? It is
not an action. I have to check the
function or maybe the description to
understand what is going on, right? So,
now we have to give it a better,
meaningful name. So, first we're going
to start with a verb. By looking to
this, we are calculating the discount,
right? So, the verb here is actually we
are calculating. So, calculate. This is
the action name. And then we have to
describe what we are calculating. It is
actually the discount. So, this is the
function name. We start with a verb and
all the names are clear. So, now by just
looking to the name, you can understand
immediately we are calculating the
discount. So, if you go and compare it
to the old one, it is way more clear,
right? Now, the next step I usually go
and check the parameters. And here we
come to the third rule. Parameter names
should explain what kind of value they
hold. So, it is very similar as well to
the function name. Don't use
abbreviations or like here single
letters for the parameters. Just use a
full name. It's going to make your life
and your colleagues' life easier. So
now, instead of having P, we're going to
say price.
As well, of course, everything
lowercased. And instead of R, we're
going to say rate.
By just renaming, everything is clear.
Calculating the discount going to need
the price and the rate. But now, if you
read this, you can ask yourself what is
P? What is R? I need some catalog to
understand how this works. All right,
moving on to another thing. After
reviewing the name and the parameters, I
usually go and check the description of
the function. So, where is the
documentation here? This is really bad.
And here we come to the rule number
four. Always use a docstring to describe
what a function does. I know this is a
topic at the start might sound annoying
for many developers, but as you do
multiple projects, you going to
understand why we document our
functions. Of course, in projects, you
will not be soloing Python. You going to
work in a team, and it is always nice to
let others know what the function
actually does. And not only for them,
actually for you as well, because
believe me, after a week writing your
function, you going to forget about what
you have written. So, by having a nice,
clean description, it is as well good
for you to remember what you have done
in case you want to refactor or maybe to
fix your function later. So, now I said
we use docstring, so what is that? It is
a string that is placed at the first
line inside the function. So, this
sounds a little bit weird, let me show
you what I mean. So, this is our
function here, and now I'm going to go
inside it. The first thing that we do
inside the function is actually not
writing the logic and the calculations,
we write a description. So, in order to
write a docstring, so that it is easier
for you to write like multiple lines of
descriptions, but for now, I'm going to
have it only like one line describing
the function. So, it is very simple,
calculate
the final price after applying
discounts.
So, actually, that's it. This is only
one line, and now you might ask the
first question and you say, "Why we are
putting this in a string? Why we are not
just using a comment like we used
before?" So, we start with the hash, and
then we put the whole thing. Well, the
first thing is that once Python sees the
hash, it understands it is a comment,
and Python will going to ignore the
whole thing. So, it will be lost, it
will be ignored, and the program, the
code, don't know about this comment at
all. But if you are using a docstring,
Python going to use this as a
description for the function, so it
going to go and store it inside the
function as documentation. So, it is not
lost, it is something that is attached
to the function, and of course, you
might still asking why we need actually
the description. We are not using this
values, this string value inside our
calculation, right? You are totally
right. We are not using this as a value
for our function, but it is there inside
the program and I can go and call it.
For example, if you go and use the
function help and then use the function
name, so something like this, Python
going to return the documentation of the
function. But of course, in order to try
this, I need something inside the
function. So maybe a return now one
something like this just in order to not
get an error. So now if you go and
execute it, now look at the output. I'm
going to get a full description of my
function including the docstring. So
this is a really nice information and it
lives and exist inside Python now. But
if I don't do it, so let me just go and
remove it and I stick with the comments.
Look at this as I'm asking for help for
the function, there is no documentation
for the function. That means I have to
open the code, to open the function in
order to read the comments. So this is
something that we check whether the
function has a description or not. Then
we go inside the function and start
checking the logic and how the function
is written. And here immediately you
going to jump to the next rule where we
going to say, "Don't print inside
functions, instead use returned value."
So now by looking to our function,
actually it is printing a lot. We have
the first print and the second print and
it is not returning anything back to our
program. And this is something that we
have to avoid. using prints. So that
means if I take the logic over here and
start like refactoring, I'm going to get
rid of the first print as well. I
understand it is nice thing to print in
the output, but we usually don't do
that. If I need to print, I always print
in the main code, not inside the
functions. So I will get rid of this and
instead of the last prints, I'm going to
go and replace it with a return of
course. And of course here we have to go
and start using our parameter. So it's
going to be the
price, price, price, and here the rate.
So, that's it actually. Don't use
prints, use return instead. Okay, moving
on to the next rule, don't modify the
values of the parameters. So, leave it
as it is, use local variables instead.
So, now by looking to this example, you
can see the parameter P is actually
getting modified by assigning it to the
new calculation. So, with that at this
stage actually, you lost the raw value.
So, we don't do this, instead we
introduce a new local variable. So, now
instead of saying price is equal, I'm
going to say final price. So, that means
the original price inside the parameter,
and the modified one is inside a local
variable. So, with that I don't lose my
values, and now I'm going to go and
return of course the final price. Of
course, at the end I'm going to get
exactly the same result, it's just like
clean way on how we work inside the
function, because as things gets more
complicated, you might go and start like
adding more steps, and it will not be
anymore clear are we using now the
original price from the input, or is it
like modified? So, just make it clean
and introduce a new variable, it will
not be bad. So, now the next one, it is
not a rule, but if you have like one
line calculation like this, and you
don't have any extra steps inside it,
you can actually skip using any
assignment and using a local variable,
you can put the whole thing as an
expression inside the return. Our
function is just one line together with
the return. So, I'm going to say this is
not like let's say hard rule, it's going
to be okay if you use it like this, or
introduce like a local variable for it.
I'm going to say if you follow those
rules, now you are 80% professional at
your codes, but you have followed all
the must rules. Now we going to go and
add some extra let's say add-ons, modern
rules. So, they are not described in the
PIP 8, but they are rules that are
actually followed by professionals at
companies. So, now the first luxury rule
says, use data type hints for the
function parameters and the return
values. Now, the thing is in real
projects, most of the bugs comes
actually from wrong data types. What
actually happens is that if I am like
calling the function and I understand,
okay, it accepts a price and rates, but
I don't know exactly which data type I
should follow. Like maybe for the price
it's going to be clear I'm going to use
maybe 100, but for the rate I might go
and add like maybe string value like
20%. Now, if I go and execute it, I will
get an error because this is a string
value and it will not work in the
calculation. It need a numeric value,
but it's something that I really don't
know by just reading the function
description or the function name. Of
course, it is now very clear that I
should not use it, but if the function
is little bit complex, you're going to
end up using a wrong data type. And this
happens a lot in projects really. So,
now instead of me try and error which
data type I should use, usually the one
that is building this function should
give me a hint. So, how we going to do
it? We're going to go to the price and
we're going to say double point after
it. So, not equal. I'm not assigning
anything. Double point, I'm going to say
float. So, now this is very important
thing to understand. This is a hint.
This is for us, for humans in order to
understand how to do the call. It is not
for Python. So, Python will not go and
change the data type of the price to
float. The data type going to be
depending on the values that you are
passing in the function call. So, Python
going to see you this is 100 and then it
going to use for it maybe a number. So,
I'm not assigning here or doing a data
type casting. It is just hint for us.
And the same thing I'm going to go and
add it for the rates. So, use a float.
So, with for me as a color for this
function, I'm going to understand
immediately, okay, the rates should not
be, let's say, string values, should be
floats or a number, of course, it's
fine. So, now with this we give hints,
of course, for the parameters, the input
of the function, but as well we can go
and give a hint for the returned value.
So, that I understand, okay, I'm
returning here a float number. Now, in
order to do it, we will not go over here
and add a double point, instead, we're
going to go over here, just before the
double points, we're going to go and add
a nice arrow, and then we're going to
say floats.
So, with that we are saying this input
can return a float. Like, it looks nice,
right? So, as I said, this is a luxury
thing, but professional Python
developers use those hints usually in
the functions. Now, another luxury
thing, but still it is professional, we
add as well description for the input
and the output inside the docstring.
You're going to find this everywhere
from professional Python coders. So, how
we going to do it? We're going to go and
add a new lines inside our docstring.
So, now this is just a description.
Usually, the first one going to be the
description of the function, and then
we're going to say args for arguments.
Now, we are just describing the input of
the function. So, just organize it nice,
we're going to say, okay, the first
input is the price, and the data type
going to be floats. And here you just
describe the input, so maybe you can say
original product's price. And then the
second input going to be the rates,
as well floats. So, we're going to say
discounts rates as numbers. Maybe I'm
going to go and add an example, 20 for
20%. Something like that. So, I'm just
describing the inputs. Now, of course,
we can go and describe the returned
value. So, we can say returns, double
points. We have here only one value, so
the final price. So, it's going to be as
well floats, final price after applying
discounts. So, with this I can say you
have now professional docstring for the
function. One line for the function
description, for the inputs, so the
parameters, and for the returns. So, my
friends, those two things, the hints for
the data types and the extended
docstring, it is something nice if you
want to work as an expert, you can go
and add those small details. So, now
just have a look, go and compare the new
design of the function with the old one.
By adding those few rules, which is
really simple, our function looks way
more professional than the old one. And
in just few seconds, you can understand
exactly what is going on, and you can
look professional at your projects. All
right, my friends, so now by looking
back to our road map, with that we have
completed the last chapter, the
functions, now you can think like a real
Python developer. So, you learned how to
break complex problems into small, clean
pieces using functions. And now, if you
sit back and look to the whole road map,
with that we have completed the whole
course, you learned the foundations of
Python, you learned how to work with
data, how to control the execution of
your Python code using logic,
conditional statements, how to automate
things using loops instead of repeating
the same thing over and over, and as
well, how to work with advanced data
types, the data structure, list, tuple,
set, dictionaries, and of course, how to
build the functions in Python. Now, my
friend, you made it. Congrats. If you
are watching this right now, then you
really should be proud of yourself.
Seriously, you just finished Python
course. This is not something small. You
didn't quit, you didn't stop halfway,
you made it until the end. That's
already puts you ahead of so many people
who starts and never finish. And now, I
would say it's really nice time to share
your new achievement. So, tell your
friends, tell your family, post it in
the LinkedIn, be proud of your new
skill. If this course helped you, leave
a review, share it with others. And of
course, I'm not saying here this is a
goodbye because this is just the
beginning. If you enjoy coding, then
this is a perfect time because you can
consider AI and data engineering. They
are currently booming in the industry.
The demand is really high. And of
course, Python is the core skill, the
foundation for those career. And if you
like my style, then follow me because
I'm going to go deeper into those
careers. And of course, if you want to
support more free content like this,
then subscribe, like, and comment. This
is going to really help with the
algorithm. And as well, it's going to
help reach nice people like you. And
now, nothing left to say but thank you
so much for taking this course, and I
will see you in the next journey.