Hello and welcome to this unique course
to master SQL. My name is Barzalini and
I lead big data projects at
Mercedes-Benz over a decade of
experience in SQL data engineering,
building data warehouses and data
analytics. Now, of course, the first
question is what makes this course so
special. Well, not only you will learn
how to write SQL codes, but more
important than that, you will learn how
exactly SQL works behind the scenes. So
I'm going to break complex concept in
SQL using hundreds of animated visuals.
This makes it really easier to
understand SQL and as well it is more
fun than just sharing my screen and I
just show you code. Right. The second
reason is this course is taught by me. I
have industrial experience and I will be
sharing with you everything that I know
about SQL and how I use it in my real
projects. So I will be sharing with you
hundreds of best practices, tips and
tricks and I'm going to show you my
decision-m process in SQL. So by the end
of this course, you will be ready to
solve any complex task like I do using
SQL. So now I designed this course to
cover the basics like writing your first
SQL query and then we're going to keep
progressing in the course by covering
advanced techniques in SQL like the
window functions, stored procedures,
indexes and even at the end we're going
to build a data warehouse using SQL. And
this course is suitable for anyone data
engineers, data analyst, data scientist
and even for students. And by the way
the good news everything is for free
from the start until the ends I will be
sharing with you as well a lot of
materials code presentations and
animations and there are no hidden
costs. So you don't have to pay for
anything. But my friends in return I
really appreciate it if you support the
channel in order to grow. All right my
friends I'm really excited about it. I
don't know about you. If you are
motivated join me learning SQL. This is
going to be amazing. So let's
go. All right. Now I'm going to show you
the road map in order to learn
everything about SQL starting from very
basics and then advance step by step
until we have very advanced topics. So
now at the start we have to understand
few stuff like what is SQL, why to learn
it, what are databases and the types of
databases and after the theory we're
going to prepare your PC with data and
the softwares. Now once we have
everything then we can go to the next
chapter. This is the basics how to query
data using SQL and here we're going to
cover the basic components in each SQL
query like select from where those
basics. Now once you understand how to
query the data, how to get the data out
of the database the next step we're
going to go and learn how to define the
structure of the database. How to create
a new table add a new column remove
column and as well how to drop a table.
So with that you are defining new stuff
in the database and then the next
chapter you have to learn about the data
manipulation. This time we're going to
go inside the table and we're going to
learn how to insert a new data, how to
update the data and as well delete few
rows from our database. So with that you
have the basics how to query data, how
to define the structure of your tables
and how to manipulate your data. And I
can say with that you cover the basics
about SQL. Now after that we start with
the intermediate phase where we're going
to deep dive into topics like how to
filter your data. Here we're going to
learn about the comparison operators,
logical operators, between and like. So
all the operators that you can use in
order to build a condition in order to
filter your data. Then after that it's
going to be very interesting topic. You
have to learn how to combine them. And
here we have two mechanism either using
the join or using the set operators. And
oh my god joining data. It's going to be
very interesting topic. Here we're going
to cover like a lot of stuff like we're
going to start with the basic joins and
then we go to advanced and then you have
to learn how to choose the right join
and after that you have to learn about
the set operators and here you have like
four methods union union all except
intersects. So with that you learn how
to combine multiple tables by combining
the columns or the rows of your tables.
So this is very important. Now moving on
in our course. Now using SQL you can do
a lot of stuff cleaning up the data a
lot of data preparations and at the end
you can do a lot of analytics and
aggregations. So there are like two
families of functions. The first one is
the role level functions and here we
have a lot of stuff you can transform
your string values the numbers date and
time and how to handle the nulls in SQL
and at the end the amazing case
statements. So all those stuffs are
transformation for only one single
value. We call it role level functions.
And after you learn how to do data
transformations, then you have to learn
about how to do data analytics and
aggregations using SQL functions. So
we're going to start with very basics
like the aggregate functions. And then
we're going to deep dive into the window
functions, analytical functions. And
here we have like aggregates, ranking
and value functions. Those are very
important tool for any data analyst or
data scientist doing analytics task in
SQL. So I can say the rowle functions is
for data engineers and the analytical
functions are for data analysts. So at
the chapter 8 we can say you have
covered now the intermediate level and
the last four chapters they will be the
advanced stuff in SQL. So here there are
a lot of techniques that you have to
learn about SQL. So the first one is the
subquery query inside another query and
the very famous CTE common table
expression. A lot of developers like
this one and then you will learn about
how to create views in the database.
This technique if you learn it you're
going to be really professional in SQL.
Then we're going to learn how to create
tables using select the temporal tables
and then we're going to learn about the
third procedures how to write a program
in SQL and after that of course comes
the triggers. So those are the advanced
techniques that you have to learn in SQL
in order to do advanced projects using
SQL. So now once you learn all those
concepts and you start writing a lot of
SQL codes you will notice that some
queries going to be really slow and for
that you have to learn how to optimize
the performance of your queries and here
there are a lot of techniques. The most
famous one is to create an index in the
database or create a partition and at
the end I will be sharing with you the
top 10 best practices that I have
learned in my projects on how to
optimize the performance of your
queries. So this is very important and
then we're going to move to very
interesting one. I will be sharing with
you how I use AI like shy GBT or copilot
as I'm using SQL in my projects. So here
you have to learn how to write correct
prompts to get assistance from AI as you
are using SQL. And finally and my
favorite one it will be about SQL
projects. So my friends here you have to
bring everything that you have learned
about SQL in handon projects. With real
projects you will get challenges and
struggle and here going to happen the
magic and the real learning and here
there are three types of projects. The
first one is data warehousing project.
This is very data engineering focused
project where you're going to learn how
to build real data warehouse where
you're going to take the data from the
raw formats and then process it in
different layers. Once you build it then
you jump to another project. Here you're
going to start exploring the data and
start getting the first insights about
the business. And the last project that
you can do is the advanced data
analytics project. So this is very
important section where you do SQL
projects. So my friends this is the road
map on how to learn SQL. So as you can
see it takes you step by step from
basics to intermediate and you will end
up having advanced topics and with that
I can tell you you will learn everything
about SQL. Okay. So now let's start with
the first chapter the introduction to
SQL and here we're going to cover few
topics. So we have to understand first
what is exactly SQL? Why we have to
learn it? what are databases and the
different SQL commands that we have in
SQL. So it is the basics the theory
about SQL. So what is exactly SQL? Let's
go. So what is exactly SQL? Everything
generate data and data is everywhere.
Your first name is data your mobile and
everything inside the mobile is data.
Car is as well generating a lot of data.
Bank, your finance statements,
everything is data. And now of course
the question is where do we store our
data? Personally we store a lot of our
data in like excels, spreadsheets in a
text file. So you store a lot of your
data in different files. Now how about
companies? They have a lot of things
that generate a lot of data that the
products that they produce their
customers as well generating a lot of
data and sales informations and a lot of
things. So companies generate massive
amount of data. So now the big question
is how they handle the data how they
store it. Of course, they cannot go
unused like simple files. They need
something bigger, stronger and smarter.
And here where the database comes in. So
think about the database. It's like a
container for storing data. But instead
of just dumping files into folders, the
database organized the data. So it is
easy to access, to manage and to search.
So a database simply it is a container
that stores data. So now you might ask
why we are using database. Can't we just
use files like I do it personally? Well,
let me tell you why we use databases.
Imagine that someone asks the following
question. Go and find the total spending
in your data. So now, in order for Mike
to find the total spending and the
costs, he will be opening each of those
files one by one, searching for the
costs trying to combine the data and
it's going to be very long and messy
process. But now in the other side, if
your data in database and you want to
ask a question, it's going to be very
easy. So all what you have to do is to
talk to the database to ask a question
and the database can answer your
question with a result. And now comes of
course the question how do we talk to a
database? Well we use SQL. SQL is the
language that you use in order to talk
to the database. It stands for
structured query language SQL. And here
you have people that call it SQL like me
and others that call it SQL. There is no
right and wrong but if you follow me
through the course I think you will
start saying SQL. So by using SQL you
can ask the database you can ask your
data and the database going to answer
your question by sending you a result.
So this process is very easy simple and
fast and this is way better than having
your data stored in different files.
Another reason why we use databases is
that they can handle really huge amount
of data. So sometimes we have like
millions of data inside our database but
in the other side if you are storing
your data inside spreadsheets and you
have like massive amount of data what
can happen your spreadsheets going to
just break they simply can't handle big
data and another reason why we use
databases is that it is just secure. It
is safer to store important and critical
data inside the database than just
storing it in spreadsheets and files. So
the databases are secure and you can
control who is accessing what. So it is
just more professional to store the data
inside a database. All right my friends
so far what we have learned most of the
companies stores their data inside a
container called a database and for you
in order to ask questions and to talk to
your database you have to speak the
language of
SQL. Now I'm going to show you how it
looks like usually in companies. So we
have our data inside the database and
then you will have multiple people with
multiple roles that are just writing
different SQLs in order to talk to the
data. But now not only employees and
people interact with the database. You
could build a website or an application
that as well interacts with the database
by sending different SQLs. And of
course, depend on how many people are
interacting with the application and the
website, it might generate really
massive amount of SQLs that sent to the
database. And not only that, you might
has as well tools in order to do data
visualizations where you have like a
dashboard or reports maybe created using
PowerBI or Tableau and it is used by
stakeholders and managers in order to
make decisions and as well those tools
will be connected to the database and
creating SQLs. So now as you can see we
have a lot of interactions with the
database from people applications tools
a lot of things are generating SQLs and
interacting with the database but the
database is just a container and storage
right so we need something a software
that manage all those requests and
that's why we have something called
database management system DPMS so it is
a software that going to manage all
those different requests to our database
and it going to make the priority which
SQL must be executed First, this
software can as well manage the security
whether the SQL is allowed to be
executed in the first place. So my
friends, the DPMS is the software that
going to manage the database. And now we
are not done yet. There is something
missing. So we have our data, we have
the software. What is missing here is
the hardware. So in real companies, we
cannot run that on our PC because first
our PC is weak and as well it goes
offline. That's why we need a server.
server it is like very powerful PC and
as well it lives 24/7 so it is always
available and here we can decide whether
we're going to have a server inside the
company or we can use cloud services in
order to run our database so my friends
so far what we have learned the database
it is container to store the data the
SQL it is the language in order to talk
to the database the DPMS it is the
manager it manage the database and the
server it is the physical machine where
the database lives so this is how it
looks
Like and now my friends there are
different types of databases. So let's
see what do we have. The first and the
most famous one it is the relational
database. It is very simple. It is like
spreadsheets call them table where we
have columns and rows and then there is
like a relationship between those tables
to describe how they relate to each
other and that's why we call it
relational database. So if people hear a
database they're going to think about
this one. Now we have another type of
databases called key value. This time
the data is organized completely
different where you have pairs of keys
and values. Think about it. It's like a
big dictionary where you have a word
like the key and the definition of the
word this is the value. And now moving
on to the next one. This is as well
important column based. So now instead
of grouping the data by the rows this
type of databases group the data into
columns. That's why it's called column
paste. And this is very advanced
database in order to handle huge amount
of data where the main purpose is to
search for data. Moving on to another
database called graph database. The main
focus here is the relationship between
objects. So the main idea here is how to
connect my data points. And now finally
we have the document database. The data
is stored as entire documents where the
structure of the data is not that
important. What is more important is to
fit everything in one page in one
document. And now if you look to those
five types, we can group the document,
graph, column based, key value, all
those databases called NoSQL databases
and the relational database, SQL
database. And in this course, we will be
focusing of course on the relational
database. And I'm sure you have heard
about like the Microsoft SQL server, the
MySQL, the
possesses they are SQL relational
database. And for the key value you have
the radius the Amazon Dynamo DB and we
have for the column paste we have the
Cassandra and the red shift. For the
graph database we have the Neo 4G and
the very famous database the MongoDB as
a document database. Now my friends for
this course we're going to be focusing
on the SQL relational databases because
it is the most famous one and the most
used one in companies and I will be
focusing on the Microsoft SQL server. So
those are the different types of
databases.
Now the databases are very structured
and organized. It has the following
hierarchy. The starting point is the
server as we learned it is powerful PC
and it is where the database lives and
inside it we can have multiple
databases. So maybe you have a database
for the sales and another one for the
HR. So the server can host multiple
databases and as we learned a database
is a container of your data. Now moving
on to the next level. In each database
we can have multiple schemas. A schema
it is like category or you can call it a
logical container that we can use it in
order to group up related objects like
let's say you have hundred of tables. So
you can split all the tables that has to
do with the orders in one schema and
then another group of tables with the
schema customers and so on. So it help
you to organize your tables and your
objects in the database. And now if you
go inside schema you can have multiple
objects like tables. So now of course
the question is what is a table? It is
like spreadsheet. It organize your data
into columns. The column define the data
that you store inside it. So you have
one column about the customer ID.
Another column about the names, the
scores, the birthday. So each column is
about one type of data and sometimes we
call the columns as fields. Now the
other thing that we have in tables is
the rows or sometimes we call it
records. It is where actually the data
is stored. Now in this example each
record represent one customer one
person. So we have one record for Maria,
John and Peter. Those we call them rows.
Now in each table there is like one very
important column called the primary key.
It is always very important to have like
one unique identifier for each customer
for each row and we use it for different
purposes in order to combine it with
another table in order to identify
quickly one customer. So it is unique.
It's like fingerprint and there is no
two customers having the same ID. Now
the overlapping between the columns and
the rows we have a single value a cell
and each value each column stores
specific data type. A data type it is
like what kind of data we are storing
like an integer 1 2 30 or a decimal
where you have a decimal point 3.14. Now
if you want to store characters we have
different data types for that like you
want to store the name or the
description. So here we can use the char
or the vchar. So you store inside them
like the first name Maria or something.
Now you might ask what is a char or
vchar. So the char always a fixed one.
So if you define it like five characters
always it's going to go and reserve five
characters from the space. But if you
want things more dynamic then you go
with the vchar. And now moving on we
have another data types called the date
and time. So if you want to store a date
like the birth dates and if you want to
store the time information you can use
the time data type. So we call those
stuff int, decimal, char, date, time.
They are data types. So my friends, as
you can see, SQL databases are very
organized and
structured. Okay. So now let's focus
more about the SQL itself. We have in
SQL different type of commands. So let's
say that we have a database and this
database is empty. So we have nothing
inside it. Now, of course, the first
thing that you have to do is to write an
SQL with the command create in order to
create brand new table in the database.
So, once you executed the database going
to go and build one, but this table is
empty. So, we have nothing inside it. So
now what you have done here is you have
defined something new, right? And we
call this type of commands the data
definition language, the DDL. We have
create to create something new, alter in
order to edit something that already
exists and drop in order to delete
something. to drop for example a table.
So this is the first family of commands.
Now if you look at our table, it is
empty. What do we need? We need data. So
let's say that we have a website or an
application. Now this application is
generating a lot of data. Now in order
for this application to move the data
inside our new table, it must use the
SQL command insert. So if you execute
insert, you can add a new data inside
your table. This type of commands we
call it data manipulation language. And
here we have three commands. insert in
order to insert a new data, update in
order to update an already existing data
and delete in order to go and delete
data from your table and that's why we
call it data manipulation language
because you are manipulating your data.
So what do we have now? We have table,
we have data inside the table. Now what
we can do we can start asking questions.
So let's say that you have analytical
question about your data. Now all what
you have to do is to write something
called SQL query and inside it you use
the command select but the whole thing
we call it a query. So you send a query
to the database, you have a question and
the database can return for you the
result, the data answering your query,
your question and we call this type of
activities using SQL, the data query
language. And here we have only one and
it is very famous. We have the select.
We can use it in order to query our
data. So those are the three different
commands in SQL. And of course, we're
going to learn all of them, but we will
spend most of our time learning how to
write the correct query for the correct
answer. And now you might ask me, Barra,
why we have to learn SQL? And if the
time goes back, are you going to learn
SQL again? Well, for sure, of course.
And here are the top three reasons that
I have. The first one, you have to learn
it in order to talk to the data. You
know, most of the companies stores their
data in databases, and this is a
standard way. This is how they do it.
And if you want to work on the company
in the data field and you want to talk
to their data, then you have to use SQL.
It's like you move to another country
where they speak another language and
you want to live there for a long time,
you have to speak their language. The
same thing here. If you want to work
with data, you have to learn the
language in order to speak to the
database, the SQL. So this is for me the
most important reason why we have to
learn SQL and SQL it is in high demand.
If you go now and check the job
description of the software developer,
data analyst, data engineer, data
scientist, I promise you you will find
there that they going to demand for SQL.
So you will find they going to ask for
SQL skills almost in each job
description. So if you check for any
data related jobs, you will find that
they going to ask for SQL skills. Now
another reason that I have is it is
industry standard. So if you go and
check multiple modern data platforms and
tools like PowerBI, Tableau, Kafka,
Spark, Synaps, you will understand that
there will be always a section where you
have to enter SQL code. So most of those
vendors adopt SQL because it is the
standard. It is widely used. It is like
selling points that their tools are
easy. So those are my top three reasons
why SQL is still relevant and why you
have to learn it. Okay, my friends. So
with that we have now clear
understanding what is an SQL why we need
it what are databases and their
different types why do we have DBMS
servers and as well now you have
understanding how things are very
organized and structured inside the
databases so that's all this is SQL all
right so with that we have covered the
basics about what is SQL and databases
now in the next step we're going to go
and set up our environments so that
means we're going to prepare your PC
with the data with the databases and all
the tools that you need in order to
learn
SQL. Okay. So now go to the link in the
description and you will land here in my
newsletter website and you can subscribe
if you want to get weekly news about my
content. I make as well post about data
and many other projects. So once you do
that what we're going to do now we're
going to go to the downloads over here
and you will find here all the materials
of different courses and the one that we
want is SQL ultimate course. Let's go
over here. Now once you do that you will
land to this page where I have listed
all the important links. So the first
one and the most important one is to go
and download the course materials. Here
you can find everything code the slides
the presentations the whole course or if
you don't want that you can go to my get
repository and there you will find
exactly the same materials. So let's go
and download everything. Okay. So now go
and put the downloaded folder somewhere
safe and let's go inside it. And here
you can find three things. The first one
is the data sets. Here if you go inside
it you will find the data for the course
the databases that we will be using in
order to practice SQL. So everything is
available here. Now the second folder
you can find all the documentations. So
that means all the visuals the
presentation slides everything that I
present during the course. It is
available here as a documentation notes
for you. Now moving on to the third one
we have the scripts. So during the
course we will be writing a lot of SQL
codes and all those codes are here
available. So that means those are all
the codes that is used in the course.
Okay. So with that you have now all the
course materials. All right. So now the
next step is that we have to go and
download the SQL Server Express and you
can find the link as well over here. So
let's go there SQL Server Express. And
now we're going to land on the Microsoft
page where we can see the different
offering from Microsoft where it's
called server. So either we have it on
the Azure or we can download it on the
on premises. But we don't want those
stuff. Just scroll down to see those two
options. So the first option on the left
side we have the developer edition. You
will get all the features and services
that Microsoft offers with the SQL
server. It is as well free but the
installation here is little bit
complicated. But in the second option on
the right side we have the express
edition. Installation here going to be
really fast and very easy. You will get
as well all the stuff that you need for
practicing SQL and learn SQL. So both of
the options are free. It's just a matter
of the installation. We will go now for
the express edition. So go and click
download now and it's very small file.
So let's go and start it. And now the
installation going to start. So we have
basic, custom and download media. So
download media means download now and
later we're going to do the
installation. Custom means we have more
control on how to download and install
the stuff. The basic is the easiest one
and the quickest one. So let's go with
the basics and click on that. And let's
go and accept all those stuff. And now
let's click on install. So now it's
going to install the applications,
drivers and so on. It may take a little
bit
time. So in order to do that, let's go
and click on install SS SMS. So let's
click on that and as well we can find
the link over here. So let's go to SQL
Server Management Studio. So let's click
on that. You can find of course this
link as well with the other links that I
have collected. So now we are again at
Microsoft page. Let's go scroll down and
now we will see the following link free
download for SQL Server Management
Studio SS SMS. So let's go and click on
that and then it's going to go and
download it. Let's go and start it. So
the first thing that we have to define
the location. I will go with the default
stuff. So let's click on
install. Okay. Setup completed. We just
installed SM SS SMS. So let's go and
close it. So now let's go and start it.
If you go to your menu over here, search
for SQL Server and you will find it
here. SQL Server Management Studio.
Let's go and start it. Okay, so now
we're going to get this window in order
to connect to our server. So again, what
is our server? It is the one we have
installed at the first step, SQL Server
Express. And that's why you're going to
see in the server name, your PC name, of
course, like it's not going to be my PC
name. But here we have something called
SQL Express. This is the server we just
installed. So in the first option, we
have database engines. We have reporting
services. Those are different stuff from
Microsoft. We're going to leave it as a
database engine. And it should be like
this. SQL Express. Now, how to access
this database? We have the following
stuff. We can do that using the window
authentications or SQL server
authentications. I'm going to say that
let's stick with the window
authentication. And the username going
to be the PC name and as well the window
user. If you don't have it for some
reason those informations, you can go to
your search search for
cmd and then here you can say who am I?
And with that you will get the PC name
and as well the user that you are
currently logged in. And this is exactly
what I'm seeing over here. One more
thing if you're having issue connecting
to your database make sure to check the
encryption. It should be mandatory and
to click on the trust server
certificates. So once you do that you
will be able to connect. Okay. So with
that we have the server we have the
client. And now the last step we have to
go and create the database. We want to
insert our data. So now if you look to
the object explorer and open the
databases you can see that we don't have
any database. So now let's do something
about it. Go back to the course
materials inside the data sets you will
find the following. You will find we
have here three folders MySQL postcress
and SQL server. So if you want to follow
with this course using different
database like MySQL and Postgress you
can find the exact same data for the
database that you are using. But now in
this course we are using the SQL server.
So if you follow me with that go inside
the SQL server folder and here you will
find four files with different
extensions. So what is going on here?
Now for this course we have two
databases. One that is very simple
called my database and second one that
has more tables called sales DB. And now
in SQL server there are multiple ways on
how to create databases. I will show you
now two methods on how to create the
database. Now the first option we want
to create the database from a script.
And if you look to those files, we have
here two files with the extension SQL.
Those are files with SQL code. So let's
start with the first one, the init SQL
server my
database.SQL. Go inside it. And now here
we have the SQL code. Copy everything.
And now let's go back to our studio and
then go to the menu and click on new
query. And here in the middle you can
paste the code. So now we have the code
for the first database. And all what you
have to do is to go and execute it. So
once we executed you will see we will
not get any error. And now on the left
side we don't see yet our database
because we have to refresh. So right
click on the databases and click
refresh. And now you can see it my
database. So now let's see the content.
Go extend it and then go extend the
tables. And now you see here our two
tables customers and orders. Inside
those tables we can find our data. In
order to see the data right click for
example of the customers and let's go
with the option select top 1,000 rows.
Once you do that you can see now in the
results we have here five customers.
This is our data inside the table
customers. So here again about the
interface on the left side we have the
object explorer where you can see the
whole structure of the database from
server to databases to tables. So you
can see the whole structure on the top
we have a menu with a lot of icons and
then in the middle this place here we
call it the SQL editor. We're going to
go and write their SQL codes and then
once you execute it at the bottom you
will get the result and messages and
below the SQL editor we have the output.
So here you can see for example the data
the results or different messages from
the database. So the interface is very
simple. Now we have to go and get our
second database. So if you go back to
our files you can find a second SQL file
the initql server sales db.sql. Open
that and let's go and copy everything
here and let's go back to our studio.
Same thing you have to go and create a
new query then paste the whole code and
this database is about the sales DB. So
let's go and execute it and with that we
will not get any errors and now we go to
the left side and we do the same thing
refresh and we can see the second
database sales DB. Now we can go and
explore it. So extend it go to the
tables and here you can see five tables
customers employees orders products. So
here this is the intermediate database
for our course. So now let's go and
check our data. For example, let's go to
the orders, right click on it and select
top 10,00. And those are the orders of
our database. Perfect. So everything is
working. So those are the main two
databases that we will be working
through the whole course. And of course
if you want to go and practice using
another database, it's totally fine. For
example, in Microsoft, there are a
database called Adventure Works. It is
really amazing. And I'm going to show
you now how to import it. We can go over
here the adventure works. So let's click
on this link. So now we are again in
Microsoft page. If you scroll down you
can see here three different types of
databases. The OLTB, data warehouse and
lightweights. So they are like different
databases. The OLTP is the most like
complicated one. A lot of tables and
transactions and so on. The data
warehouse it is like really nice one in
order to do data analyzes and stuff. The
lightweight it is the simplest one. So
let's go for example and get the data
warehouse. So click on that and now as
you can see the extension of this file
isbak and now I'm going to show you the
second way on how to create databases in
SQL server. So now all what you have to
do is to go to the following path. It
really depends where you have installed
the SQL server. So for me I have
installed it in the program files
Microsoft SQL Server MSSQL SQL Express
then MSSQL backup. You have to go there.
So here what you can do you can place
all the files with the extension bak.
For example, the adventure works that we
just installed. This is a backup file
for the database and we want to go and
restore it and with that you are
creating like a database. So this is the
second method on how to create databases
in SQL server by restoring the database.
If for some reason the script didn't
work for you. Now let me show you
quickly how we can do that. Let's go
back to our studio. Right click on the
database and then here we have an option
called restore database. Click on that.
And now here we have two options under
the source database and device. The
default going to be database but we have
to switch to a device because we want to
import it from files. And then we go to
these three dots. Click on that. And now
we have to go to the option add. And now
it's going to take you to the place
where the SQL server creates backups. So
here we can find our files and what we
want you to create is the adventure
works. Select that. Then okay, one more
okay and one final okay. So now the
database will be restored and it is
successfully. So now on the left side we
can see our third database. If you don't
see it go and refresh of course and here
you will find a lot of tables in the
adventure works. And as usual we can go
and explore the data by selecting top
thousand rows. So my friends now you
have three databases but of course our
focus is only the first two that we have
done my database and sales DB. And with
that you have learned two ways on how to
import databases into SQL server. So
with that my friends we have prepared
everything. We have the SQL Server
Express running on your local PC. We
have the studio the clients where we're
going to use it in order to interact
with the database and we have created
our two databases that we will be using
in order to practice SQL. So we are
ready. All right my friends. So with
that we are done with the first chapter.
We have our introduction to SQL and now
we're going to start learning the first
thing in SQL and that is how to query
our data. So let's go and start with
that.
Okay, so now we can understand exactly
what is an SQL query. Now normally your
data is inside the table and your table
is inside the database and now you might
have a question from the business like
what is the total sales? What is the
total number of customers? So any
question that you have in your mind and
you want to go and ask your data you
want to go and retrieve data from the
database and in order to do that you
have to talk to the database using its
language the SQL. So in order to do that
you're going to go and write a query
where you write inside the query
something called select statement and
with that you are asking the database
for data. So once you execute your query
the database going to go and fetch your
data and then it prepares a result to be
sent back to you. So with that you are
asking the database a question by
writing a query and the database going
to process your query and answer your
question by sending back data and with
that we are like reading our data from
the database and the queries will not
modify anything will not change the data
inside your tables or even change the
structure of the database. So you use
select statement only in order to read
something from the database. You just
want to retrieve data from the database.
So this is what we mean with a
query. And now my friends, each SQL
query has usually different sections,
different components. We call them
clauses. And this is amazing because
you're going to have enough tools to
write a query that matches any question
that you have about your data. So what
we're going to do, we're going to cover
all those clauses step by step in order
to write any query that you need. So now
we're going to start with two clauses
that makes the simplest query in SQL.
the select and from. So let's start with
that. All right. So now it's really
important for me that you understand how
SQL works with the code with the
queries. So now what I'm going to do,
I'm going to show you on the right side
the syntax of the query in SQL and then
on the left side I'm going to show you
exactly step by step how SQL going to go
and execute your query. So now we have
the table customers inside our database
and we will start with the easiest form
where we're going to select everything.
Select the star. So the select star is
going to go and retrieve all the columns
from your table. So everything and the
from clause it's going to tell SQL where
to find your data. So with the select we
select the columns that we want and the
from you specify the table where your
data come from. So the syntax going to
be very simple. In each query we start
always with the select. And now since we
want all the columns we're going to
write star and with that SQL going to
understand I want to see everything. And
then after that comes the keyword from.
And now we want to tell SQL where the
data come from. So we have to specify
the table name. And that's it. This is
all what you need to do. So once you
execute it what's going to happen? SQL
going to go and execute first the from
clause. So it's going to go and retrieve
all the data from the database to the
results. And then in the next step going
to go and check the select statement. So
which columns we have to keep in the
result since you are saying star then
the SQL going to keep everything all the
columns and with that you will see in
the result everything all the columns
and all the rows. So that's it. This is
how it works. Now let's go back to scale
in order to select few data from our
database. Okay. So back to our studio.
Let's go and start a new query and let's
go and find our database just to expand
it and our tables. Now it is very
important to make sure that you are
connected to the correct database. So go
to the top left in the menu over here
and make sure to select your database.
So my database like this or we have a
command for that called use and then
just write the database name like this.
So I'm telling SQL just use my database
like this and with that SQL going to
switch to your database. Now if you are
learning any new programming language,
it is very important to understand about
the comments. So comments are like notes
that you add to your code in order to
understand what is going on. And of
course the engine, the database will not
go and execute it. it's going to go and
ignore everything inside it. And there
is like two ways on how to do that.
Either you make inline comments by
typing two dashes like this and then you
write anything this is a comment. So now
in SQL if you see it is green that means
it is a comments. Now the other type you
can have multiple line comments and in
order to do that what you can do you can
write slash and then start and then you
can write anything this and then start a
new line is a comment. So as you can see
all the lines after the slash star it is
getting green that means it is a comment
and now let's say that you are at the
end. So in order to close it you write
again star and then slash and that you
are telling SQL I'm done with my
comments. So those are the two types of
writing comments in SQL. Now back to our
query. Let's say that we have the
following task says retrieve all
customer data. So I would like to see in
the results all the data of my customers
everything all the rows and all the
columns. So currently our data is stored
inside the table called customer and I
need to see all the data in the output.
In order to do that we're going to write
a query and all our query start always
with a select and since I need
everything all the columns we write star
and then a new line. Let's go and
specify for SQL from where it's going to
go and get the data. So it's going to be
from and then we going to write the name
of the table. It must be exactly like it
is in the database. So it's called
customers and you have to have it here
as a customers. So that's it. Let's go
and execute it. And now if you look to
the results, you can see we have four
columns and five rows. So with that you
are seeing everything inside the table
customers. You can see we have five
customers and you can see all the
columns about the customers. So this is
very simple. We have ask question for
the database using SQL query and the
database should answer our question by
returning our data in the results. All
right. So now let's move to another
task. I'm going to go and create a new
query and this time we're going to
retrieve all the order data. So that
means I would like to see all the data
inside the orders. So let's go and write
a very simple query. We start as usual
with select and since we want
everything. So it is select star from
our table orders. So that's it. Let's go
and execute. And with that you can see
in the output we have again four columns
but this time we have only four rows. So
that means in this table we have four
orders and we can see all the data
inside this table. So with that we can
understand we have five customers inside
our database and these customers did
generate four orders. So as you can see
we are now talking to our database and
this is the simplest form of query in
SQL. All right. So now let's move to the
next step in our query where you say you
know what I don't want to see all the
columns from the database. I want to be
more specific. So I would like to select
exactly the columns that I need. So now
we want to select few columns from the
database where we select only the
columns that we need instead of
everything. Now about the syntax we're
going to go and change a little thing.
So instead of using star we're going to
go and make a list of columns that we
want to see in the output. So we're
going to select column one column two
and we're going to separate them using a
comma. So we are just writing a list of
columns exactly after the select. And
for the from it's going to stay as it
is. So from a table. Now if you execute
this what going to happen as usual SQL
going to start with the from. So it's
going to go and get the data from the
database and then the next step is going
to go and check the select. So what
going to happen? SQL going to go and
keep only two columns like for example
the name and the country and all the
columns that are not mentioned in the
select statements will be excluded. So
SQL going to go and remove it from the
results and keeps only the columns that
we mentioned in our query. So this time
instead of having four columns in the
output we can have only two. So with
that you are like filtering the columns
and you are selecting exactly what you
need. So now let's go back to SQL in
order to practice this. All right. So
now we have the following task and it
says retrieve each customer's name,
country and score. So that means I don't
want to see everything from the table
customers. I need only to see the three
columns. So let's see how we can do
that. As usual we start with select and
I'm going to go with a star in order to
see the whole table first from the table
customers. So it's exactly like before.
Let's go and execute it. And now I can
see everything inside the table
customers. But the task says I need only
three columns. So now what we're going
to do instead of the star, we're going
to make a list of columns. So we start a
new line and then we write the name of
the first column. So the first name and
a new line for the second column for the
country and then again a comma and then
we write a score. So with that we have
the three columns. Now what I usually
do, I go and select them and give it
then a push using a tab. This just looks
nicer and easier to read. So with that
we have now between the select and from
list of columns. Now there is like
mistake that happens a lot where we go
and type a comma after the last column.
So if you do that and execute it you
will get an error because SQL going to
expect from you a column after the comma
and since there is no column and
immediately you have a from you will get
an error. So there is no need for a
comma after the last column. Now let's
remove it and execute. And now that you
can see in the output we don't have four
columns we have only three. the first
name, the country and the score. And by
the way, they are ordered exactly like
you selected in your query. So first we
have the first name and then the country
and then the last one the score. So that
means if I go and now change the order.
So let's get the country at the end and
execute. You will see the country at the
end. I'm going to go and put it back in
between to match exactly like the task
and remove the last comma. So execute
again. And with that we have selected
few columns from our table. So we are
more specific to what we need. Okay. So
that we have covered the two select and
from next we're going to talk about the
wear clause that you can use in order to
filter your data. So let's
go. So what is exactly where? We use
where in order to filter our data based
on a condition and any data that fulfill
the condition going to stay in the
output in the result and the data that
don't meet the condition will be
filtered out of the results. Condition
could be anything like for example we
say the score must be higher than 500 or
you can say the country must be equal to
Germany. So any condition that you have
in your question. Now let's see the
syntax in SQL. As usual we start with a
select. We select the columns that we
need. Then we write from where the data
come from and then after the from we're
going to write the where and exactly
after that you specify your condition.
So now let's see how SQL going to
execute this. First SQL start as usual
from the from. So it's going to go and
get your data from the database and
after that SQL going to go and execute
the wear clause. So let's say that the
condition should be higher than 500. And
now what going to happen? SQL going to
check each row whether it meets this
condition or not. So for example for
Maria she doesn't fulfill the condition
because her score the 350 is not higher
than 500. So she doesn't fulfill the
condition and SQL going to go and remove
completely this row this record from the
results. Now SQL going to go to the
second record. So Joan is fulfilling the
condition. So he going to stay in the
result. The same thing for George. Now
moving on to the fourth one Martin. So
this customer is not fulfilling the
condition and SQL going to go and remove
it from the results. The same things
happen for the last customer. The score
is zero and not fulfilling the
condition. So that means if we apply
this filter, SQL going to return only
two customers out of five. So with that
we are filtering the rows based on
condition using the work clause. Now as
you can see in the result we are getting
all the columns but if you specify in
the query like for example only two
columns like the name and the country
then SQL going to start removing as well
the columns of the results. And this
means in the output we will get only two
columns and two rows. So with that you
are filtering the columns and the rows
of your results. So now let's go back to
scale in order to practice this. All
right. So let's have the following task
and it says retrieve customers with a
score not equal to zero. So now if you
are looking to our task you see we have
like here a condition. The condition
says the score must not be equal to
zero. So I don't want to see all the
customers. I want to see only the
customers thus fulfill this condition.
So it's like we have to filter the data.
So let's go and solve the task. Let's
start as usual. Select star. There's no
specifications about the columns from
our table customers. Okay. So I'm going
to start with this. Let's go and execute
it. Now if you look at the result, you
can see like almost all the customers
are fulfilling the condition. Their
scores are not equal to zero. Only one.
The last customer his score is zero. So
this customer does not fulfill our
condition. Now let's go and build filter
for that. So we're going to say where.
And now there will be a section that is
only focusing on how to build conditions
and filtering in SQL. So don't worry a
lot about the syntax of the conditions.
We're going to cover that later of
course but it is very simple. Now for
the condition we need a column. So in
which column is our condition based on
it's going to be on the score. So we're
going to write here score and since we
are saying not equal there is like an
operator in SQL called not equal and
then we have to write a value after
that. It's going to be a zero. So again
the condition is like this. The score
must not be equal to zero. It's very
simple, right? And with that we have our
condition and we are using the where in
order to filter the data. So let's go
and execute it. And now as you can see
SQL did remove the last customer because
he is not fulfilling this condition. And
we have now only the rows that fulfill
our condition. So as you can see it is
very simple how to filter the data. All
what you have to do is to write where
clause after the from and then write a
condition after that. Now let's have
another task like for example it says
retrieve customers from Germany. So I
don't want to see all customers from
different countries. I just want to see
the customers that come from Germany. So
that means we have a condition here.
Country of the customer must be equal to
Germany. So let's go and remove the
current condition. It is not the one
that we need and execute. If you are
looking to the results, we have two
customers that come from Germany and we
are interested only to show those two
customers. So let's go and make a filter
for that. We're going to write where
clause and after that we need a column.
The column going to be the country. So
we're going to write here country and
this time the country must be equal to
Germany. So we're going to write an
equal operator. So we're going to write
Germany like this exactly like the value
inside our data. But now as you can see
we are getting like an error here. And
that's because in SQL if you want to
write a value that contains characters
then you have to put it between two
single quotes. So at the start you put a
single quote and as well at the end. And
now as you can see the red line is away
and the value now is red and that's
because it is a string value. It is a
value that contains characters and with
that you will not get an error. So if
your columns contains only numbers you
can write it without single quotes. But
if your values contains characters then
you have to write it between two single
quotes. Okay. So now back to our
condition the country must be equal to
Germany. Let's go and execute it. And it
is working. So as you can see now we are
seeing in the output only the customers
does fulfill my condition where the
country is equal to Germany. So this is
exactly how we work with the wear clause
in order to filter our data. So my
friends this is how you filter your
rows. And now let's say that I would
like to filter the rows together with
the columns. So I just want to keep the
first name and the country and not
interested to see the scores and the
ids. So in order to do that we're going
to go to the select and list the columns
that we want to see. So the first name
and after that a comma then the country
and that's it. So let's go and give it a
push and execute it. So we have two rows
and two columns. So guys as you can see
SQL is very simple. All right. So with
that you have learned how to filter your
data using the wear clause. Next we're
going to talk about how to sort your
data using the order by. So let's
go. Okay. So what is exactly order by?
You can use this type of clouds in order
to sort your data. And of course, in
order to sort your data, you have to
decide on two mechanism. Either you want
to sort your data ascending from the
lowest value to the highest value or
exactly the opposite way using
descending from the highest value to the
lowest. And the syntax kind of looks
like this. So as usual, we start with
the select and then from and after the
from you can specify order by and with
that you are telling SQL we have to sort
the data and you have to specify two
things. First you have to specify for
SQL the column that should be used in
order to sort the results. So for
example you can say score and after the
column name you have to specify the
mechanism. So for example you say
ascending from the lowest to the
highest. And in SQL if you don't specify
the mechanism the default going to be
ascending. So you will not get an error
if you don't specify anything after the
column name. But my advice here is
always to specify something after the
column easier because it's just
straightforward and easier to understand
and if someone reads it can understand
immediately it's going to be ascending
because maybe not everyone knows what is
the default in SQL. So always specify a
value even if it's like easier to skip
it and if you want to store the data
from the highest to the lowest then you
can specify descending. So as usual SQL
going to go and start from the from it's
going to go and grab your data from
database. Then the second step is SQL
going to go and sort the result. So the
order by going to be executed and SQL
going to see okay I'm going to sort it
by the score and using the sending
mechanism and still going to go and
start like moving around your rows where
the first row going to be the customer
with the highest score and in this
example John has the highest score the
900. So John going to appear as a first
row at the result and that's because his
score and after that the second highest
is going to be George with 750 and SQL
going to go and keep sorting the data
and then we have 500 then 350 and the
last row going to be the customer with
the lowest score the zero. So this is
how SQL executes your order by. Now
let's go back to scale in order to
practice. All right. So now we have the
firming task and it says retrieve all
customers and sort the result by the
highest score first. So now by looking
at the task we need all the customers.
So there is like no conditions or
anything to filter but we have to sort
the results. So let's go and do that.
We're going to start as usual by
selecting all the columns from the table
customers. So now if you go and execute
it you will get all your customers and
you are now seeing the data exactly like
stored in the database. And you can see
the result is not sorted by the scores.
So we have here a low score then high
score then low and so on. Now the task
says we have to sort the results. So we
have to go and use the order by and now
you have to understand from which column
and we can get that from the task. So it
says it should be sorted by the score.
So we're going to go and define the
score here. And the final thing that you
have to define is the mechanism
descending or ascending. And you can get
it as well from the task. So we have to
sort the data by the highest score
first. So the highest first and then the
lowest. So that means we're going to go
and use the descending. So that's all.
Let's go and execute it. Now as you can
see in the results, the first customer
has the highest score. Then we have the
second one with the second highest until
the last one with the lowest score.
That's it. This is how you sort your
data. And with that we have solved the
task. Now let's do exactly the opposite.
So we want to sort the results by the
lowest score first. So that means we
want to see first the customers with the
lowest score like here in this example
we should see the ID number five as the
first because he has the lowest score
the zero. Now in order to do that all
what you have to do is to switch the
mechanism instead of descending when you
can use ascending. Let's go and execute
it. And that's it. As you can see now we
have the lowest score then the second
lowest score until the last row. It's
going to be the customer with the
highest score. So the lowest score comes
first. So it is very simple. This is how
you sort your data using
SQL. And now I'm going to show you one
more thing that you can do with the
order by. You can sort your data using
multiple columns. And we call it nested
sorting. So now let's take this very
simple example where you want to sort
your data using country. So we are
saying order by the column country and
the mechanism going to be ascending. So
from the lowest to the highest. Now if
you do that going to go and sort the
data this time based on the country. So
we're going to have like the first two
customers from Germany. It is sorting it
alphabetically. Then we have the UK and
the last two going to be from USA. Now
if you are checking the final results
you might say you know what there is
like something wrong. The data is not
completely sorted correctly. So if you
are looking to the first two customers
that come from country Germany. You can
see the scores are sorted in ascending
way from the lowest to the highest. So
first we have 350 then 500. Then UK it's
fine because we have only one customer.
Now if you look to the customers from
USA you see that it is like sorted the
way around. It is sorted descending from
the highest to the lowest. So first we
have the score 900 then zero. So there
is like no clean way on how the data is
sorted and the result is not really
clean and this issue happens usually if
you are sorting your data based in a
column that has repetition like here the
country we have twice Germany and twice
USA. So now in order to refine the
sorting and make it more correct, we can
include in the sorting another column in
this scenario for example the score. So
we can make a list of columns in the
order by and we can separate them using
the comma. And of course you can have
different mechanism for each column like
for the country we are saying it is
ascending but for the score we say you
know what let's make it descending. It
will not be only one for all columns. So
now what can happen is we're going to
start sorting the data for each section.
So for the two customers from Germany
the sorting going to be from the highest
to the lowest. So it's going to go and
switch the two customers. So Martin
going to be first because he has higher
score than Maria. And with that we are
refining the scores based on the same
value of course the country. Now for the
UK nothing going to happen because we
have only one value and for the USA as
well nothing going to happen because it
is already sorted in the correct way
from the highest to the lowest. So as
you can see if you are including a
second column you are refining your
sorting and as well my friends the order
is very important. So this is how you
can do nested sorting in SQL. Let's go
back to our SQL and start practicing.
All right so now we have the following
task and it says retrieve all customers
and sort the results by the country and
then by the highest score. So again we
need all customers. So select everything
from customers table. And now the task
says we have to sort the result by the
country. So we're going to start with
the order by and since it says by the
country. We're going to go with the
country and we're going to sort it
alphabetically. So it's going to be
ascending. So let's go execute it. Now
you can see the data is sorted
completely differently by the country.
So we have first Germany, UK and then
USA. But that's not all and says then by
the highest score. So we have to go and
include another column in the sorting
and we can go and add that by adding a
comma and then mention another column
the score and now we have to specify the
mechanism. It says by the highest score.
So the highest must come first and with
that we are using descending. Now what
is the current situation in that? If you
look to the results for example for
those two customers we have 350 and then
500. So that means the scores are sorted
ascending right the same thing for USA.
So from the lowest to the highest. Now
if you go and do it like this what going
to happen it's going to go and switch
it. So you can see over here now for
Germany first comes the highest the 500
and then the 350 and for USA as well
they switched. So we have the highest
and then the lowest and with that we
have solved the task. Now again the
order of those columns are very
important. So since the scores comes
after the country we will not get the
highest scores first at the results. So
we will not get the 900 as a first row.
And that's because the scores must be
sorted after the country. So the country
has more priority. Now if you go and
flip that. So let's go over here and
says sort first the score and then the
country. So let's go and execute it.
It's called has first to sort the
scores. So with that you will get the
900 first, right? And then the
countries. And since there is like no
duplicates in the scores, this makes no
sense at all. So you can go and skip it.
So nested sorting only makes sense if
you have repetition in your results and
you can use the help of a second column
in order to make the sorting perfect. So
that's it and with that of course we
have solved the task. All right. So with
that you have learned how to sort your
data using order by. Now in the next
step we're going to talk about how to
aggregate and group up your data using
group by and we're going to put it
between the where and the order by
because in the order of the query the
group by comes between the where and the
order by. So let's
go. Okay. So what is exactly group by?
It's going to go and combine the rows
with the same value. So it's going to go
and combine and smash press your rows to
make it aggregated and more combined. So
all what group by does it aggregates a
column by another column. Like for
example, if you want to find the total
score by country. So you aggregate all
the scores value for one country. If you
have this kind of tasks, then you can
use the group I. Let's see the syntax of
that. We will start as usual with the
select. And now what we want to see in
the result is two columns. So we have to
specify like a category like the
country. This is the value that you want
to group the data by. and another one
where you are doing the aggregations. So
for example you are saying I would like
to see the total score. So we use the
function sum in order to summarize the
values of the score. After that as usual
we use the from in order to select the
data from specific table. And now comes
the magic we use after the from group
by. And now understands okay I have now
to combine the data. I have to group up
the data by something. And this time we
are saying you have to group up the data
by the country. So that means each value
of the country must be presented in the
output only once and for each country we
want to see the aggregation and that is
the total score. So let's see how is
going to execute it. So it's going to
first start with the from it's going to
go and get the data from the database
and then it's still going to execute the
group by and now scale understand okay I
have to group up now the data by the
country and it understands it has to
aggregate the scores for that. So it's
going to go and identify the rows that
are sharing the same value. Like for
example here we have two rows for
Germany and it's going to bring it to
the results. So now we have two rows for
the same country but since we are saying
group by country SQL going to try and
combine them smash them together in only
one row. So each value of the country
must exist at maximum once. We cannot
leave it like this. So now what we going
to do with the scores? We have two
scores. Now SQL going to check the
aggregate function. It is the
summarization. So, and it's going to go
and add those values 350 + 500. And with
that, we're going to get the total score
of 850. And with that, as you can see,
scale is combining those two rows into
one. So, in the output, Germany will
exist only one. And about the scores, we
will get the total score. And the same
thing going to happen for the next
value. In the country, we have the USA.
We have it twice. So, we're going to get
two rows. And scale going to combine
those two rows in one because USA must
exist only once. And with the scores we
will have the total scores. So 900 plus
zero we will get 900. And with that it's
still converted those two rows into one.
And for the last value in the countries
we have the UK. It's going to stay as it
is. There is no need to smash and
combine anything because it's already
one value. So my friends if you are
looking to the output you can see we
grouped the original data by the
country. And that means we're going to
get one row for each value inside the
country column. So my friends the
original data you have five rows in the
output if you are using group by like
this you will get only three rows. So
this is exactly how the group by works.
Let's go back to scale and practice.
Okay. So we have the following task and
it says find the total score for each
country. So from reading this you can
understand we have to do aggregations
and we have to combine the data by a
column. So now usually I start like
this. I start selecting the columns that
I need in order to solve this task. So
what do we need? We need the country and
score from our table customers. So let's
start like this. Now you can see we have
the countries and the scores. And the
task says we have to group up the data
by the country. So that means this is
the column where we're going to do the
group by and the total scores will be
aggregated. So what we have to do? We're
going to use the group by since it says
for each country. We're going to use it
over here. Group by country. And now we
have to go and aggregate the scores. We
cannot leave it like this. So we're
going to say the sum of the score. So
let's go and execute it. And with that,
as you can see, we are getting the total
scores for each country. So now instead
of having five customers, we have only
three rows now. And that's because the
countries has three rows. And now if you
check the result, you can see something
weird. It says no column name. And
that's because we have changed the
scores. It's not anymore the original
score. It is it is the total scores. We
have summarized those values. So SQL
don't know how we going to call it. So
those values doesn't come directly from
the database. It is manipulation that
you have done here. Now in order to give
a nice name for that we can go and add
aliases. An alias it is only like a name
that lives inside your query. So we can
do it like this as and you can specify
any name you want like for example total
score. And now scale can understand okay
this is the name for this column and if
you go and execute it you will see the
new name in the results. But you have to
understand this name exists only in this
query. You are not renaming anything
inside your database and you cannot use
it in any other queries. It is just
something that is known inside this
query and only for your results. And of
course you can rename anything any
column like for example here you can say
this is the customer country and if you
execute it you are just renaming the
column in the output. So this is really
nice in SQL. Okay. So now there is like
one more thing about the group I the
non-aggregated columns that you are
adding in the select must be as well
mentioned in the group I. So now for
example let's say that okay I'm seeing
now the countries the total scores I
would like to see as well the first
name. So you go over here and say you
know what let's get the first name. So
country first name the total scores and
execute. You will get an error because
it's going to tell you I need only the
columns that you want to group the data
by or should be aggregated. So now the
first name it is not aggregated and as
well not used for the group I. So it is
just here to confuse SQL and it will not
work. So if you bring a column either it
should be in the aggregation or it
should be part of the group I. So in
order to fix this and you really want to
see the first name you can go over here
and say you know what let's add it to
the group I and execute. This time it
going to work because all the columns
that are mentioned here is as well part
of the group I. So now as you can see we
have the countries the first name and
the total scores and you can see again
we have five rows we don't have three
rows and that's because now you are
combining the data by the country and as
well the first name and now you can see
in the output we are getting five rows
we are not getting anymore the three
rows the three countries and that's
because SQL now grouping the data by two
columns the combination of the country
and the first name and those two columns
gives five combinations and that means
you will get five rows so that means you
have to be really careful what you are
defining in the group I and the number
of the unique values that those columns
are generating going to define the
output the results. So if you go and
remove the first name and from here as
well you are grouping by only one column
and this column has only three values
and that's why you are getting three
rows and with that of course we have
solved the task and now let's extend the
task and say find the total score and
total number of customers for each
country. So that means we need two
aggregations. We have the total score
and as well we need the total number of
customers. So from reading this you can
understand we still want to group up the
data by the country but this time we
need two type of aggregations. We need
the total number of customers and the
total scores. So we have almost
everything but what is missing is the
second aggregation. Now what you can do
you can go over here and add another
aggregate function called the count. And
what we want to count is the number of
customers. So we can go and add the ID
over here and call it total customers.
So now of course SQL going to So now if
you go and execute it, you will get as
well the total customers by the country.
And now as you can see SSQL has no
problem with the ID and that's because
you are aggregating the ID. So SQL know
what to do with it and how to combine
it. So that means you don't have to
mention the ID in the country because
you are aggregating it. So that's all
with that we have solved as well the
task. All right. Right. So with this you
have learned how to group up your data
using the group eye. Next we're going to
talk about another technique on how to
filter your data but this time using the
having clause. So let's
go. All right. So what is exactly
having? You can use it in order to
filter your data but after the
aggregation. So that means we can use
the having only after using the group I.
So let's see the syntax of that. So
again like the previous example we are
finding the total score by country. So
we have our select from group I and now
you say you know what I would like to
filter the end results and in order to
do that we use the having after the
group I and now like the wear clause you
have to specify a condition. So we have
the following condition where we want to
see in the results only the countries if
their total score is higher than 800. So
this going to be our condition. So now
you might noticing something with the
group by we are using the country the
column where we are grouping the data by
its value but with the having we are
using the aggregated column the sum of
the score. So this is how the syntax
works and now let's see how is going to
execute it. So as usual SQL start with
the from we are getting our data and
then the second step is going to go and
aggregate the data by the country. So
it's like before going to group the rows
with the same value of the country. So
we're going to have one row for each
country and this is what going to happen
if you use group I and with that we have
now aggregated values right and after
the group IQL going to go and execute
the having. So having it is like a
filter. Now we have a nice condition the
total sale must be higher than 800 and
SQL going to go and check the new
results after the aggregation. So in
Germany we have the total sales of 850.
So it meets the condition and it going
to stay in the results. The same thing
for USA it is higher as well than 900s
but for UK it is not meeting the
condition 750 it is not higher than 800
and SQL going to go and filter out this
row so that means after applying the
having we will get only two countries
because they have values that is
fulfilling the condition and that's it
is what can happen if you are using
having it is simply filtering the data
but now you might be confused you say
you know what we have used the wear
clouds to filter the data so why we have
in SQL another cloud how to filter my
data. Can't we just use the where? Well,
in SQL there are like different ways on
how to filter your data based on the
scenario. So now let's go and add both
of the filters in my query. We are
already using the having after the group
I and now let's go and add the wear.
Usually the wear comes between the from
and the group I so directly after the
from. And here we are saying the score
must be higher than 400. So now we are
filtering based on the scores twice,
right? Once we are saying the score
higher than 400 and by having we are
saying the sum of score must be higher
than 800. So what is the big difference?
It is when the filter is happening. If
you want to filter the data before the
aggregation you want to filter the
original data then you can go and use
the wear clause. But if you want to
filter the data after the aggregations
after the group by then you can go and
use having. So it's really all about
when the filter is happening. So let's
see how is still going to execute this.
So as usual first the from going to be
executed to get the data. Then after
that the second step the wear going to
be executed. This is our first filter.
So SQL going to filter the data using
where before doing any aggregations and
based on our condition the first
customer will be filtered out because
score is less than 400 and the same
thing for the last customer. Now after
the applying the wear clouds we will get
only three rows only three customers.
And now next SQL going to go and execute
the group by. So it's still going to go
and group the data by the country. So
now we have fewer data to be combined.
So the values will not be summarized
because we have only one row for each
country. Now after the data is
aggregated by the group by then SQL
going to activate the second filter
having. So the next step is going to
execute the having and here SQL going to
filter the new results based on the
total scores and still going to check
one by one. So, USA is meeting the
condition. UK going to be filtered out
because it is not higher than 800. And
this time Germany as well will be
filtered out because this time it is not
fulfilling the condition. In the
previous example without the wear, we
had more scores for Germany. That's why
it passed the test. But this time since
we filtered a lot of customers using the
wear, Germany will not have enough
scores pass the second filter. So with
that in the output we will get only one
row and that's because we are filtering
a lot of data. So it is very simple
where going to be executed before the
group by before the aggregations having
going to be executed after the group by
after the aggregations. So now let's go
back to scale in order to practice.
Okay. So now we have very interesting
task find the average score for each
country considering only customers with
a score not equal to zero. So it sounds
like condition and return only those
countries with an average score greater
than 430. So this is again another
condition. So I know there is a lot of
things that's going on. Let's do it step
by step. Usually I start by doing a very
simple select statement with the columns
and data that I need. So let's start
with a simple select. So what do we need
over here? We need a score. We need a
country. Again we need a score country.
So all what we need is two columns. Now
I'm going to go and select the ID just
to see the customer ID. Then let's go
and get the country score from our table
customers. So let's go and query that.
So now as you can see I start with the
basics. Query the data and then build up
on top of it the second step. Now what
do we have in the task? We have to find
the average score for each country. That
means we have to do some aggregations.
And here we have two conditions. The
first condition says we need only the
customers with a score not equal to
zero. And the second one we need only
the countries with an average score
greater than 430. Now you have to decide
for each condition whether you're going
to use the where or having. Now for the
first one we want to filter based on the
scores. So that means we want to filter
before the aggregations. It's not saying
the average score. It's saying the score
itself. So that means we can use for
this a wear condition. Now about the
second one it says countries with an
average score greater than 430. That
means we want to filter the data after
aggregating the score. So that means for
this condition we have to use the
having. Now what I would like to do is
to implement the first condition. It's
very simple. We're going to say where
after the from the score is not equal to
zero. So let's go and execute it. And
with that we don't have any customers
where the scores is not equal to zero.
So that we have solved this part. But
now for the second condition first we
have to do the aggregations. So we're
going to start with the average score.
We're going to go over here and say
average and we're going to call it
average score. Now we don't want to see
only the average score. We want to see
the average score for each country. So
that means we have to aggregate by the
country and for that we use the group I
group by comes always after the wear
clause. So group by and which column?
It's going to be the country. So
country. Now there is like an issue
here. You cannot execute it like this.
We have to go and get rid of the ID. We
don't need it at all. So let's go and
execute it. So with that we have the
average score for each country and we
have solved the first part. So that
means the first and the second part they
are completed. Now we're going to talk
about the last part. The average score
must be higher than 430. And for that
we're going to use the having and having
comes after the group by. Now we need to
specify the condition. It must be the
aggregated column. So we're going to
take the average score from here and put
it after the having and it should be
greater than 430. So that's it. With
that we have the last part as well.
Let's go and execute it now. And with
that my friends we have filtered the
data after the aggregation. So this is
how I decide between the where and
having. It is very simple. All right. So
with that you have learned how to filter
the aggregated data using the having.
And now next we're going to go back to
the top where we can use there the
keyword distinct exactly after the
select. So let's go now and learn about
the
distinct. Okay. So what is exactly
distinct? If you use it in SQL, it's
going to go and remove duplicates in
your data. Duplicates are like repeated
values in your data and it's going to
make sure that each value appears only
once in the results. So it sounds very
simple and as well the syntax is easy.
So as usual we start always with a
select but directly after the select we
use the keyword distinct. So there is
nothing between them and then the normal
stuff we specify the columns and then
the from in order to get the data from
table. Let's say that I would like to
get a list of unique values of the
country. So the first thing that SQL
going to do of course is to get the data
from the database using the from. And
now the second step is the select. So
SQL going to execute it and going to
select only one column the country. All
other columns going to be excluded and
removed from the results. And now SQL
going to go to the third step. It's
going to go and apply the distincts on
the country values. So it acts like a
filter where it going to make sure each
value happens only once. So it's going
to start with the first value Germany.
Now it's going to look to the results.
Do we have Germany? Well, we don't have
anything yet. So that's why it's going
to include it in the results. Then the
next value is going to be USA. The same
thing. We don't have USA in the results.
So it's going to go and include it. And
this happens as well for the UK. We
don't have UK in the final results.
That's why it's going to go as well
included. Now comes Germany again. Now
it's going to say wait, we have it
already. So it will not go and add it
again in the output because it must
appear only once. So we will not have
Germany twice. And as well for the last
value the USA we have it already in the
results that's why it will not appear
again and with that we have removed the
duplicates or the repetition inside our
data. So each value is unique. Now let's
go back to SQL. Okay that task is very
simple. It says return unique list of
all countries. So let's go and do that.
It's going to be funny. So select and
now let's get the column country from
our table customers like this. Now you
can see we have a list of all countries
but the task says we need a unique list.
So that means I cannot have here
repetitions inside it. And with that
we're going to use the very nice
distinct. So if you do it like this
let's go and execute. You will see there
will be no duplicates in your results
and all the values in the result going
to be unique. So with that we have
solved the task. It's it's very simple.
Now there is like one thing about the
distinct that I see a lot of people
using it a lot in cases that it's not
really necessary. So for example, let's
go and get the ID. Now if you go and
execute it, you can see here we have a
list of all ids and there are no
duplicates. But now if I go and remove
the distinct and executed, we will get
the same results because the ids are
usually unique. So it really makes no
sense to go and say distinct because as
you can see the database has to go and
make sure each value happens only once.
So there's like extra work for the SQL
and it is usually an expensive
operation. So if your data is already
unique, don't go and apply distincts.
Only if you see repetitions and
duplicates and you don't want to see
that only in this scenario, go and apply
the distinct. Don't go blindly for each
query applying distinct just in case
there is duplicates. This is usually bad
practices. Okay. So that's all for
distinct. Okay my friends. So with that
you have learned how to remove the
duplicates using the distinct. In the
next step we're going to talk about
another keyword that you can use
together with the select. You can use
top in order to limit your data. So now
let's go and understand what this
means. Okay. So what is exactly top or
in other databases we call it limit. So
it is again some kind of filtering in
SQL. If you use it, it's going to go and
restrict the number of rows returned in
the results. So you have a control on
how many rows you want to see in the
results. The syntax is very simple as
well. Directly after the selects you're
going to use the keyword top and then
you specify the number of rows you want
to see in the results. So for example
three and then only after that you
specify the columns that you want and
then from which table. Now let's see how
going to execute it. So as usual the
from going to be executed we will get
our data and then the second step is
going to go and select the columns. In
this case all the columns going to stay
and then after that it's going to
execute that top. So how it works? It's
very simple. For each row in database,
we have a row number. It has nothing to
do with your data with the ids. For
example, here like in the current
result, we have row number 1 2 3 4 5.
Those numbers are not your actual data.
It is something technical from the
database. So it is not equal to the ids.
For example, the ids is actually your
content your data. So here we are not
filtering based on the data based on the
row numbers. So since here we have
defined three SQL going to count. Okay.
row number one 2 three and that's it. So
it's going to make a cut and all the
rows after number three they will be
excluded from the results and you will
get only the three rows at the results.
So now as you can see this type of
filtering is not based on a condition or
something it's just based on the row
numbers. So whatever results you have in
your data it will go and make a cut at
specific row. So let's go to scale and
practice that. Okay. So now we have a
very simple task. It says retrieve only
three customers. So let's go and do
that. We're going to go and select star
from our table customers and execute it.
Now as you can see in the output we have
five customers. But the task says we
want only three. And there is no
specifications at all about any
condition. So I don't have to go and
make a work clause where we write a
condition based on our data. We just
want three customers. So we can do that
very simply by just adding top exactly
after the select and then specify the
number of rows you want to see from the
output. So select top three and then the
star. Let's go and execute it. And with
that we are getting three customers.
That's it. It's very simple. All right.
Now moving on to another task. It says
retrieve the top three customers with
the highest scores. Now of course this
is like a mix between ordering the data
and filtering the data. Right? So we
usually sort the data by the scores from
the highest to the lowest. But now it's
like we are doing both together. So
let's do it again step by step. I will
just back to the select star from
customers. Now what we can do we can go
and sort the data by the score from the
highest to the lowest using the order by
so order by score and then descending.
So let's go and execute it. And now you
can see the first customer is with the
highest score and then the second
highest and so on. Now I think you
already got it in order to get the top
three customers with the highest scores.
What you have to do is to just go over
here and say top three and execute it.
And with that you have now a really nice
analyzis on your data. It's like a
reports where we are finding the top
customers with the highest score. So
this is really amazing and very easy. So
as you can see mixing the top with the
sorting the data you can make top end
analyzes or bottom end analyzers. So
let's have this task retrieve the lowest
two customers based on the score. So now
we want to get the lowest scores in our
table. And in order to do that is very
simple. What we're going to do we're
going to flip that. So we're going to
sort our data based on the scores
ascending from the lowest to the
highest. And since we want only the
lowest two customers, we're going to
replace the three with a two and execute
it. And with that, we're going to get at
the lowest two customers. It is Peter
and Maria. They have the lowest scores.
Again, it's very easy. Okay, this is
fun. Let's go to the next one. Get the
two most recent orders. Well, this time
we are speaking about another table.
Let's go and select everything from the
table orders like this. So now, as you
can see, we have here four orders and we
want the two most recent orders. So most
recent means we have to deal with the
order dates and we can build that by
sorting the data by the order dates. So
order by order dates and since we are
saying the most recent orders so from
the highest date to the lowest that
means descending right let's go and
execute it and as you can see based on
our data and now we can look to our
result this is the last order in our
business based on the order age and this
one is one of the earliest orders. So
with that we have sorted the data and
since we want the two most recent orders
we go over here and say we go exactly
after the select and say top two and
execute and with that we have now the
last two orders in our business. So as
you can see combining the top with the
order by you can do amazing analyszis.
All right so this is how you limit your
data using top and with that you have
learned the basics everything that you
can learn and with that you have learned
all the clauses the sections that you
can use in any query in SQL. Now next
what we're going to do we're going to
put everything together in one query in
order to learn how SQL going to go and
deal with all those clauses and how SQL
going to go and execute it. So let's go
and do
that. Okay. So now I'm going to show you
the coding order of a query compared to
the execution order that happens in the
database. So the coding order of a query
starts always with a select and then
exactly after that you can put a
distinct and then after the distinct you
can put a top. So this is the order of
all those keywords and then you can go
and select like few columns and after
you specify the columns separated with a
comma you tell SQL from which table your
data come from using the from clause.
Now after that if you want to filter the
data before the aggregation you can use
the where clause and this always comes
directly after the from. And if you want
to group the data then you have to do it
after the wear clause using the group by
and after the group buys comes the
having if you want to filter the data.
And the last thing that you can specify
in query it is always the order by. So
this is the order of all those
components of the query. And if you
don't follow this order you will get an
error from the database. Now if you look
to this query there are a lot of things
that's going to filter your data. So
let's check them one by one. The first
thing that you can do is to filter the
columns. If you don't want to see all
the columns, you want to see only
specific columns, you use the select and
of course you must use it. So the
columns that you specify will be shown
in the results. So it's like filtering
the columns. Now there is another type
of filter where you filter out the
duplicates if you want to see unique
results and that's using the distinct.
So this is another type of filter.
Moving on, we can filter the result
based on the row numbers. So we can
limit the result using the top. But this
type of filter doesn't need any
conditions. It's purely based on the row
number in the results. Now moving on, if
you want to filter your data based on
conditions based on your data, you can
filter the rows before the aggregation
using the wear clause. And the last type
of filtering, you can filter your rows
after the aggregation using the having.
So as you can see, we have like five
different types and how to filter the
results in SQL. So now let's see the
execution order. As we learned the first
thing that's going to happen is that SQL
going to execute the from clause. So SQL
going to go and find your data in the
database where all the next steps going
to be paste on this data. Now the next
step that is going to do is that it's
going to go and filter the data using
the wear clause. This has to be happen
before anything else. So before any
aggregations and so on we have to make
scope of the data. So once SQL apply it
maybe some of the rows going to be
removed and once the data is filtered
the third step SQL going to execute the
group I so going to take the results and
start combining the similar values in
one row and start aggregating the data
based on the aggregate function that you
have specified. So now after the group
by after aggregating the data what is
going to do now it's going to go and
apply the second type of filter the
having. So based on the condition the
SQL going to go and start removing few
aggregated data away and keep the rest.
Now moving on to the step number five.
Finally it's going to go and execute the
select distinct. So SQL going to go and
start selecting the columns that we need
to see in the results and remove the
other stuff. And once the columns are
selected SQL going to go and execute the
order by. So SQL going to start sorting
the data based on the column that you
have specified and the mechanism as
well. So the data will be sorted
differently. And my friends the last
step that going to happen in your query
will be always the top statements. So
based on the final final results SQL
going to go and execute the top. So here
we are saying top two that means we want
to keep only the first two rows without
any conditions. So SQL going to count
okay row number one two and after that
it's going to make cuts and remove
anything after that. So this is the last
filter that's going to happen and as
well the last step. So now if you sit
back and look at this the coding order
is completely different than the
execution order in the coding we have
first to specify the select actually the
select going to be executed just almost
at the end. So at the step number five
and once you understand how SQL execute
your query you can understand how to
build correct
queries. So now the first thing that we
have learned that we can go and have
like one query right something like this
select star from customers. Now this is
one query and in the output we have one
results but did you know that in SQL we
can have like multiple queries and
multiple results in one go. So we can do
everything together like for example
let's say I'm selecting as well the data
from orders. So that means we have two
queries and now if you go and execute
what can happens you will get two result
grids. The first result grid is for the
first query and the second one is for
the second query. So with that you can
do multiple queries in the same window
and with that the results can be
splitted into multiple window depend how
many queries you have and usually in SQL
you might find that by the end of each
query there is a semicolon like this. So
at the end of the first query we have
semicolon and for the second query we
have as well at the end another
semicolon. For the SQL server it is not
a must but for other databases if you
have multiple queries in one execution
you must separate them with a semicolon
and with that the database can
understand okay this is the end of the
first query and this is the end of the
second query. So you have like
separations between
queries. Okay. Now moving on to another
cool thing in SQL. Now what if we don't
want to query the data inside our
tables, we would like to show a static
value from us from the one that is
writing the query. And this is very
practical. If you are like practicing
and you want to check something using a
value from you, not from the tables. So
how we can do that? It is very simple.
We're going to write select and then now
after that instead of having a column
name you can go and add any value like 1
2 3. So it is just a number and we do
not specify after that any table. So we
leave it like this. Select 1 2 3 and we
don't need to use the from close. So now
if you go and execute it you will get 1
2 3. So this is a static value. And of
course you can go and rename the column
like static number. So execute it again.
So with that we have a static value. And
you can go and add anything like string
as well. So let's say hello as static
for example string. So let's go and
execute. Now we have two queries. The
second one you can see our static value.
Hello. So in queries we can add values
from us. Not only selecting data from
the queries but of course you can go and
mix stuff. So we can have like in one
query data from the database and static
data from us. So let me show you what I
mean. Let's go over here and say select
and let's go and get for example the ID
the first name from the table customers
like this. So with that we can see we
are getting data from the database. But
now I can go and add something from me
new customer and we can call it customer
type. So now what is going on here? Two
columns from the database and one column
from us. It is the static one. So if you
go and execute it, you can see for the
ID and the first name those data comes
from the database. But for each record
we are always getting the same static
value new customer, new customer and so
on. So this piece of information comes
from the query. It is not stored inside
the database and those two informations
come from the stored data inside the
database. So this is really cool thing.
You can add few informations from you
and you can get the data from the
database. This is the static
values. Okay. One more cool thing that I
want to show you that if you have a
query like this you are selecting from
table and filtering the data and now you
would like not to execute the whole
thing. You would like to execute only a
part of this query. So now sometimes as
you are writing a query, you don't want
to execute the whole thing. You want to
execute only part of the query. Like for
example, I would like to see all the
customers again in this query without
this filter. So instead of removing it
and then query and then again adding it,
what you can do, you can highlight what
you want without now the filter and
execute. So without the database going
to execute exactly what you highlighted.
And now as you can see I'm getting all
the customers without the filter. And if
you don't highlight anything and
execute, what's going to happen? It's
still going to execute the whole thing
inside the editor. And this is really
nice if you want to query another table
quickly in the same editor. Like we want
to select everything from the orders
just quickly. So you can highlight only
this query and execute. And with that
SQL is ignoring everything else and only
executing what I'm highlighting. And
this is really nice. It gives us like
speed and dynamic. And you're going to
find me doing that a lot in the course.
So this is really nice. Okay. My
friends. So with that we have learned
the basics about SQL query. the basic
components of the select statements and
with that you can talk to our database
in order to get data. Now in the next
chapter we're going to learn how to
define the structure of our database. So
we're going to learn the data definition
language DDL. So let's
go. Okay. So usually if you have like an
empty database what you want to do is to
go and define the structure of your
data. So one of the first things that we
usually do is we go and create a new
tables. So here we have a command called
create and if you use it you can create
a new object inside the database like
for example a table. So once you execute
it you're going to get brand new table
and usually the table going to be empty
without any data. So it is very simple.
This is what the create command does.
And now let's go to SQL in order to
create a new table. So my friends we
have the following task. Create a new
table called persons with columns ID
person name birth date and phone. Okay.
So this time we will not start by select
we will start with the command create
table. So we are telling SQL to create a
table and after that we have to define
the name of the table. So in this task
we have to call it persons. Now we have
to go and open two parenthesis like this
and in between we have to define the
columns. So what do we need? First we
need an ID. So this is the first column
name. And next we have to define which
data type for this column. It's going to
be an int. So it is a number does not
contain any characters. And now next we
can define some constraints and we
cannot have a person without an ID. So
it should not be in null. So not null.
This is the first column. So we have
defined the name of the column, the data
type and the constraint. Okay. So let's
go to the second column and here we're
going to have a comma and the next one
name going to be person name. So this is
the column name and the person name we
can have. And now the data type for this
column it going to be a varchar because
the person name contains characters. So
vchar. And now we have to define the
length. So I'm going to go with 50
characters. And now I would say this is
a must. So each person should has a
name. So we're going to say not null as
well. So that we have the name, the type
and the constraint. Now let's move to
the third column. It's going to be birth
date. Now which type of informations we
have inside the birth date? So it's
going to be a date, not a number, not
characters. So we're going to go with
the data date. And now about the
constraint well depends. I would say in
our application it is an optional
because this is very personal
information and maybe some persons will
not provide their birth dates. So this
is an optional and I will not say it is
not null. So nulls are allowed. Now
let's move on to the next one. It's
going to be the phone. So now what is
the data type of a phone? Well we have
some types numbers we have characters
special characters. So we could have
anything. So that's why I'm going to go
with the farchar. And here you can
specify the length that you think it's
okay. I'm going to go with 15. Now of
course depend on the system that you are
building. I would say the phones are
very important in order to validate
whether this is a real person. So we're
going to say not null. So we are not
allowing nulls in this field. Perfect.
So with that we have covered all the
columns that are required. We have
defined the data types and as well the
constraints. Now the last thing in each
database table we should has a primary
key in order to make sure this table has
an integrity and maybe as well
connectable to other tables. So now what
we're going to do, we're going to go and
add the primary key constraint, comma,
for the last column. And then we're
going to say constraint. Now we have to
give a primary key name. This is only
going to be visible for the database. So
I'm going to call it PK for primary key.
And here persons and then after that
we're going to say primary key. And
between two parentheses, we're going to
go and pick which one is the primary
key. And of course, it's going to be the
ID. So we're going to go over here and
say ID. So again, we are saying there is
a new constraint. This is the name of
it. It's only internal for the database.
And then we are saying this one is a
primary key on the field ID. So that's
it with that. We have defined a primary
key for our table. Let's go and execute
it. So as you can see it is successful.
Let's go and check our database for our
new table. So if you don't see it
already, you have to right click on the
database and then go and refresh. So
let's go to tables and now we have a
brand new table called persons. So with
that we have created our new table. Now
of course for the DDL commands you will
not get results or data. All what you're
getting is a message from the database
and the message says here the command
completed successfully and then we have
a date when this is completed. So that
means the DDL command will never return
data. It is changing the structure of
your database. It's not about retrieving
any data and so on. So this command did
change something in our database and in
this scenario it created a new table and
that's why we call this data definition
language DDL because we are defining the
database. Now of course if you go and
say select star from our new table
persons. So let's go highlight it and
then execute it. You will see we are
getting of course the columns. So the
ID, the person name, birth date, the
phone but we don't have any rows that
means our table is empty. Now what is
very important to that you go and save
those informations in an SQL script
because maybe later you have to redefine
this table but let's say that you have
created different queries and you have
lost the script and now I would like to
see again the create statements for this
table well there is trick for that if
you go to the left side you see the
persons right here right click on it and
then you have here script table as and
now we have here different options that
you can run on the table and the first
one says create two Then let's go to new
query
editor. So now what happened? The
database did read the metadata
informations about the person and
created your DDL query with many extra
stuff that we haven't done. But this is
the template that the database uses. So
now we can see a lot of stuff. But what
is interesting is this create table. So
we can see create table the schema DBU
the default one then the persons and
then we have our columns the data type
and as well the constraints. So with
that you got back your DDL statements
and many other stuff about the table
which is now not interesting. But now
what I really need is to see the create
statements about this table. So this is
how you can get back your DL command.
But of course what I recommend you is
always put your code inside a get
repository and always keep it up to
date. So that always you can check your
work and extend
it. Okay. So now what else you can do
with the structure of your database? If
you have already a table, what you can
do, you can go and edit and change the
definition of the table. So for example,
let's say I would like to add a new
column. In order to do that, we can use
the command alter. Alter means you want
to edit the definition of your table and
you want to change it like adding new
column or maybe changing the data type
and anything in the definition of the
table. So the alter command, you can use
it in order to change the definition of
your table. And now let's go back to
scale and try to change something. All
right. Now the task says add a new
column called email to the person's
table. So it is very simple what you can
do. We can use the alter table command.
So we are not creating new table. We
want to edit already existing table. So
which table we want to modify it's going
to be the persons. So we are telling SQL
we want to change something in the table
persons. And of course we have to tell
SQL what we want to change. Are we
removing a column? Are we adding column?
In this scenario we want to add new
column. So let's go and add the email
information. So this is the column name
and as you are creating a table you have
to define column name the data type and
the constraint. So now for the emails
we're going to have like characters,
numbers, special characters. So we're
going to go with the varchar and about
the length it's going to be let's say 50
and I'm going to say each person has to
has an email. So it's going to be not
null. So with that we are adding
completely a new column. So that's it.
Let's go and execute it. Now again this
is not a query. This is a DDL command
and in the output we will not get data.
We will get a message whether everything
went correctly. So it says command
completed successfully and the time when
this is completed. Now we can go and do
a simple query just to have a check to
the table. So and now you can see we
have our columns and at the end we have
a new column called emails. This is very
important. If you are adding new column
it's going to be always at the end of
the table. But now you might say you
know what I would like to have the email
like something in the middle maybe after
the person name. Well, in order to do
that, you have completely to delete and
drop the table and create it from the
scratch using create command which is
might be bad if you have data inside the
table. So if you are fine by adding your
new column at the end, you can use the
alter table. But if you say I would like
it in the middle, then sadly you have to
go and drop everything and start from
the scratch. Okay. So now let's have
another task and it says remove the
column phone from the person's table. So
now we're going to do exactly the
opposite. We're going to go remove it
completely with its data from the table.
So we're going to still saying alter
table persons. We are saying we want to
edit the definition of the table
persons. And now instead of adding we
will be dropping a column. And then
after that we have to specify as well
the column name. It's going to be the
phone. But we don't have to mention
again the data type and the constraint.
And that's because the database already
knows those informations. So we need
those informations if we are creating
something new. That's why we can get rid
of that. We just need the column name
and the database is going to do the
rest. So let's go and do that. Now you
can see successful. And now let's go and
check our table. And now as you can see
we have the ID, person name, birth date,
email, and we don't have the column
phone. Be careful. If you are deleting
column, you will be losing as well all
the data inside this column. So as you
can see, this is very simple. This is
how we can edit the definition of our
table by adding and removing columns.
Okay, now moving on to the last one in
this group of commands. So now so far
what we have done, we have created
something new in the database. We have
changed the definition of something
inside our database. And now the last
one, you can go and drop something from
the database. Let's say we have another
table and we don't need it anymore. So
we can go and use the drop command in
order to remove the table completely
from the database. And this means as
well removing everything the table and
the data inside it. So now let's go to
SQL and let's drop something from our
database. Okay. So now our task says
delete the table persons from the
database. This is the simplest form of
command in SQL but yet the most risky
one. So what we need? We have to delete
and drop the whole table persons. We
don't need it anymore. We're going to
say drop table and then all what we have
to do is to give the name of the table
persons. So three words. You don't have
to specify anything. Just destroy the
table persons. Let's go and execute it.
It is successful. So as you can see it
is very simple. Now on the left side to
your database go refresh and go to the
tables and you will not see the table
persons. So the drop command it is very
simple but yet very risky. So if you
compare now create table with a drop
table you can see destroying things is
way easier than building it. Those are
the commands create alter drop. those
commands we use in order to define the
structure of our database the DDL
commands that was very simple all right
so that's all about the data definition
language DDL and with that you have
learned how to define new stuff in your
database now moving on to the next one
we're going to learn about the data
manipulation language and here we're
going to learn how to manipulate our
data inside the database let's
go all right so now what we're going to
do we're going to go and modify and
manipulate your data inside the
database. So now sometimes what happens
you have a table inside your database
and the table is empty. You don't have
any rows any data inside the table. Now
in order to add your data to the table
what you can do you can use the command
insert. So insert going to go and add
new rows to your table and of course not
always the table must be empty to add
your data. You can add new rows to
already existing data and SQL going to
go and append it at the end of the
table. Now my friends in order to insert
new data to the target table there are
two methods. The first and the classical
way in order to insert new data we can
use the insert command and manually
specifying the values that should be
inserted to the table. So you're going
to start specifying in the script the
values and then they're going to be
inserted as a new rows to the target
table. So in this process you are
manually inserting new values to the
table using like an SQL scripts. So now
we're going to focus on this scenario on
how to insert data. All right. Now let's
check quickly the syntax of the insert
command. It start with the keyword
insert into and after that we have to
specify the table name. So where we want
to insert and then we make a list of all
columns that we want to insert. And then
we specify list of columns where we're
going to insert values into them. And
after that we say values. And finally
we're going to go now and specify the
data that should be inserted to the
table. and we make it as well as a list
like we have done for the columns. Now
in the insert statements specifying
those columns it is totally optional. So
if you don't specify the columns of the
table then SQL going to expect you to
insert values into each column because
sometimes of course we don't want to
insert value for each column. You can
skip few columns of course but if you
want to insert a value for each column
either you go and specify them as a list
or you can skip it. Now for the insert
statements there is very important rule.
The number of columns and values must
match. So if you specify here three
columns then you must insert as well
exactly three values. So this must be
matching. And one last thing about the
syntax you can insert multiple values in
one go. So for each row you can specify
a list of values that must be inserted.
So that's all about the syntax. Let's go
back to SQL in order to practice insert
command. Okay. So now let's go and
insert a new customers. So it's very
simple. It start with insert into. So we
are saying we want to insert data into.
So we have to go and specify the table
name customers. Now after that we have
to specify list of columns where we want
to insert data into it. And what we can
do we can go and check which columns do
we have inside our table. So we can see
we have ID, first name, country, score.
And we can go and make a list of that.
So we can say ID, first name, country
and score. So we just have a list of all
columns inside our table customers. Now
what we need? We need the values. So
which data should be inserted. So we can
go and open two parenthesis. And now we
have to specify an ID. We know the last
customer was five. So we're going to go
with the customer six. Now we have to
give the name of the customer. Let's go
for Anna. And then a country. Let's go
for USA. And this customer has no
scores. So what we can do? We can say
null. So we don't know the score of this
customer. nulls means nothing we don't
know. So with that you can go and insert
one row. But now let's say that I would
like to go and insert like a second row
one more customer. What we can do we can
separate this with a comma and then we
can go and repeat the whole thing again.
So the ID is seven. The next one let's
call this customer Sam and we don't know
the country of this customer. So we're
going to say it's null. But the score we
know it already. It is 100. So as you
can see we are adding a value for each
of those columns. And if you don't know
the answer then make it null. if the
database allows it to be null. Some
columns they are not allowed to be null
like the primary key. So if you go and
say over here null the database will not
allow it. Well actually we can go and
test it. Let's execute. And you can see
you cannot insert the value null into
the column ID. So this is not allowed.
Going to have a seven. But for the other
columns it is allowed. You can go and
check the definition of the table. Now
we go and execute. Now the output of the
modifications command is going to always
indicate what happens to the data. So it
says two rows affected. Affected might
be inserted, updated, deleted. So you're
going to get a general statement from
the database. But you are getting how
many record is affected. So we got two
because we have inserted two records. So
now as you can see it's not like the
query. We are not getting any data in
the output. We are just getting a
message. So this is a big difference
between querying the data using the
selects and modifying the data using
inserts. We are doing now direct
modifications to the data inside our
database. Of course, if you want to see
the data in the customers, what we can
do, we can go and query the data, right?
So, let's go and do that. Select star
from customers. I would like to see the
whole table. So, market and execute it.
Now, you can see we have seven
customers. So, we just manipulated our
data. We have here Anna and Sam. This is
how you can insert data to the database.
Now, there's like few rules you have to
be careful as you are inserting new data
to your tables. You have to pay
attention that the order of the columns
that you have defined. insert is
matching the values that you are
inserting over here. Let's have an
example. I'm going to go and remove this
over here and let's say that we are
inserting a new one number eight and now
in the first name instead of the name of
the customers we have inserted the
country like USA and in the country we
have inserted the name is just mistake
and we are all human right? So let's
have a name like this max. Now if you go
and execute it the database can accept
it because it is really hard for the
database to understand that you have
made here an error. Both of them are var
and the database doesn't care about the
content of the data as long as you are
following the rules of the data type. So
now if you go and select the data from
the customers you can see now we have a
customer called USA from the country
max. So the SQL going to do it blindly
like you insert the data as long as you
are following the data type rules and
the constraints. So for example, if you
made this error over here and you say
the id is max and let's say the first
name is let's say nine and you execute
it here the database is smart enough to
say you know what there is something
wrong the ID should not be strange so
the database going to reject your
inserts be careful of the order of your
columns now let's go and query again our
table now if you are in the insert
commands defining all the columns
exactly like the table so as you can see
we have here complete match ID first
name country score we have all the
columns and as well the correct order
there is like lazy way you can go and
remove the whole thing over here and
with that the database can understand
okay we are inserting values to all of
the columns so going to understand you
are inserting something to each columns
in the correct direction so let's go and
do that correctly nine and here let's
say we
have from Germany so if you go and
execute it it will be working even
though we didn't define the columns and
that's because the values that we are
inserting as exactly the same number of
columns of the table and following as
well the rules. Now moving on to the
next one, you can go and add only two
columns in the definition. If you know
already always the country and the score
is null. We know only two informations,
the ID and the name. Then you don't have
always to go and say null null null and
so on. We can go and skip that. Okay. So
now let me show you what I mean. We're
going to go after the table name and
we're going to define only two columns,
the ID and the first name. So that means
we are telling SQL we want to insert
only two columns. And now you have to be
careful. If you define here two columns
then the values should be as well two
columns. So we're going to remove the
country and the score. And we can go and
add only two informations. So 10. And we
can go and add here for example Sara. So
if you go and execute it, it will be
working. And now what is skill is doing
with the other two columns. It's going
to be nulls. So let's go and select
again from our table. You can see here
Sara has null in the country and as well
in the score because we didn't define
those informations. But be careful, you
cannot here skip a column that is not
allowed to be null. So you have always
have in your list all the columns that
are not null. So for example, I cannot
go and insert only the first name. I
will get an error because the database
can try to insert a null in the ID and
this is not allowed. So you can skip
only nullable
columns. All right, my friends. So that
was the first method on how to insert
data to your target table as you saw by
typing manually the values inside an
insert command using values. And now
let's move to another methods. We're
going to insert data but this time not
manually. We're going to insert data
using another table. So imagine we have
the following scenario. We have an
already existing table with data and
this going to be the source table, the
source of your data and we have another
table. This table is empty and we want
to insert a new data to this target
table. Now what we can do, we can take
the data from the source table and
insert it into the target table without
manually writing the script for the
values. So we are moving the data from
one table to another. Now in order to do
that we need to do two steps. The first
step we have to write an SQL query using
select from and so on in order to select
the data that we need from the source
table. And once you do that you will get
a results. So this is like you are doing
a normal query. You right select and you
will get an answer with the results. And
now what we can do in the next step we
can take this results and use an insert
command in order to insert this results
into the target table. And with that we
have moved the data from the source
table to the target table. So first
write the query on the source table. And
the second step use an insert to move
this results to the target table. So
let's go back to the scale in order to
do that. So now we have the following
task and it says insert data from the
table customers into the table persons.
So that means the source table is the
customers and the target table is
persons. Now how I usually do it that I
keep my eye on the target table to
understand the structure of this table
and I start writing the query from the
source table. If you go to the left
side, we can see okay, we have here an
ID. We have here person name, birth date
and phone. And you can see only the
birth date except nulls and the rest we
have always to provide informations. So
with that I have now understanding about
the table persons. Now next I'm going to
go and start writing the query from the
source. So we start like this. Select
star from our table customers just to
have an overview of our table. Now the
next step we're going to go and design a
perfect result from this query that is
matching the target table. So in the
output we need ID and we have it from
the customer from the original table.
We're going to go and select ID. Okay.
So now next we need a person name and
here we have from the original table
something called first name. So this is
a perfect match. So we're going to go
and select this table as a second
column. So we have covered the first
two. Then the third one is going to be
the birth date. Well, my friends, we
don't have birth dates, but the database
can accept it as a null. So, I'm going
to go and write a null because I don't
have such information from the source
table. And now the next one going to be
the phone as well. We don't have phone
informations. But we cannot have it as a
null because it says here not null. So,
what we're going to do, we're going to
go and add a static value, a default
value. So, we're going to have two
single quotes and in between we're going
to say unknown. Since it is var, it can
accept this word. So, now let's go and
just query. So we have the ID, we have
the first name, the birth date is empty,
and the phones is unknown. Now you might
say, but the column name is not matching
with the column name of the persons.
Well, the database does not care about
that. As long as the result of the data
is matching the table, it can go and
insert it. So the database will never
compare the column names together. But
if you like and go and add here like the
aliases exactly like the target table it
will not hurt but it has no effect on
the results. All right. Okay. So now we
have like query select and we have a
results but this is not an insert. So
how we going to insert the result of
this into the table persons. Well for
that we need the insert into command. So
insert into and now we have to specify
the target table going to be the
persons. And of course you can go and
list all the column names but if you
have like exact match you can skip it
but for me I would like always to add it
just to make sure that we don't have any
issue. So the ID, person name, birth
date and the
phone. So that's it. Let's go and
execute. So it is working now. We can
see 10 rows affected. Well that means 10
rows are inserted from the table
customers into the target persons. And
now what we can do we can go and query
the table persons just to check that
everything is working perfectly. Select
star from persons and let's go and
execute. And with that you can see our
10 persons that we have added from the
customers. So with that we have moved
the data from one table and inserted
into another table. And as you can see
it was very simple. First you have to
write a query from the source table in
order to collect the data that you need.
and then you go and insert it into the
target table. So this is really nice and
easy and this is another way on how to
insert data into your
database. Okay, so with that we have
learned how to insert data to our
tables. Now let's say that I don't have
something new. I don't have any rows to
be added to my table but I have an
update. I would like to go and change
the content of the already existing
rows. So what you can do? We can use the
command updates in order to change the
content of already existing rows. So
again my friends insert going to go and
insert completely new rows but update
going to go and change the data of
already existing row. Now let's have a
look quickly to the syntax of the
updates. It start with the keyword
updates and then we have to specify the
table name and after that we're going to
use sit in order to specify what are the
new values for the columns. So you have
to write down for each column that you
want to update a new value and you
separate the columns of course using a
comma. Now after that we have to specify
as well a wear condition. So it's like
the queries you say where and then you
write a condition and if you don't do
that and you don't use the wear clause
what going to happen you will be end up
updating all the rows inside your table.
So that's why we need always the wear
clause. All right. So that's all about
the syntax. Let's go back to SQL in
order to update our data. Okay. So let's
have the following task and it says
change the score of customer 6 to zero.
So that means we have to go and modify
the data of the customer ID equal to
six. So now first I would like to go and
have a look to our data. So select star
from customers and now the task is
targeting this customer over here and we
would like to replace the null to zero.
Now how we can go and update this
information inside the table? We can use
the update command. So what we going to
do? We're going to start writing update
and after that we have to specify the
table name. So what we are updating? We
are updating the customers and then
we're going to tell the database to set
the value of the score to a zero. So we
would like to update and change the
value from null to a zero. And now here
comes something very risky. Don't
execute this query yet. If you do that,
what's going to happen? The database
going to go to the table customers and
replace all those values of all
customers to zero. So it's going to go
and update the whole table and this is
of course very risky. That's why in the
update command we have to give a wear
condition a filter in order to target
only specific row or the rows that you
want really to modify. In this case we
want to change only one row. So what we
have to do is to go and specify the work
condition like we have done in the
select query. Nothing new, right? So
we're going to say where the customer ID
is equal to six. And with that SQL will
not go and update everything. First it's
going to filter the data and then
updates. And now before I execute just
to make sure I go and check which data
going to be affected. So it's very
simple you go and select star from table
customers and then I go and take the
exact where and put it in my query and
then I select the whole thing and
execute. And now if this query gives me
the data that should be modified then
I'm doing the update command correctly.
And in this case we are targeting only
one customer. This is the customer
number six. And with that I feel really
confident with my update. So what we can
do since I'm going to use this later I'm
going to put the whole thing in a
comment and if I execute now only the
update going to be executed. So let's go
and do that. Now very important to check
the message you can see one row is
affected which is really good because if
I see here 10 rows is affected that
means everything is updated. Now let's
go and check the data. I'm going to go
and remove the wear here and check the
whole table. Now you can see we still
have the old scores only Anna has now
score zero instead of null. So this is
how I usually update the data. You have
to do it very carefully. Now let's move
to another task. It's going to say
change the score of the customer number
10 to zero and update the country to UK.
So now this time we are targeting the
user number 10. As you can see she
doesn't have the country and score. And
the task wants us to change the score to
a zero and the country to UK. So now how
we going to do it? We're going to use
the exact same command but with
different condition. So the ID this
times is equal to 10 and the score is to
zero. But now we have to change as well
the country. Now if you want to do
multiple updates, you're going to have
here a comma after the score and the new
line and let's say country equal and
then we're going to add UK. So select
the whole thing and let's go and
execute. So again it is affecting only
one row. This is really good. And if you
go and check the table search for Sara,
you can see in one update we have
updated two columns the country and as
well the score. So with that we have
solved the task. It's very simple. Now
moving on to the second task. It says
update all customers with a null score
by setting their score to a zero. So
this time we are not speaking about one
specific customer. We are talking about
updating the data for a subset of
customers. So now imagine you have like
hundreds of customers and you are making
one update command for each customer.
It's going to be really wasting of time.
Now instead of that we can specify a
condition that targets multiple
customers and we're going to do the
update for those customers in one go. So
now let's see how we're going to do it.
We are talking only about replacing the
nulls with a zero. So we don't need the
country. So set score equal to zero. But
now we will not be specific for the ids.
Now we have to make a new condition.
It's going to say like this where score
is null. Now of course in the course we
have a full dedicated chapter about the
nulls and here all what we are doing is
we are searching for scores that is
equal to null. But we cannot write an
equal we have to write it like this is
null. Of course before we update
anything we have to go and test it in a
query. So select star from customers
where score is null. Let's go and
execute. Now as you can see we have two
customers where the score is null. So
that means this condition is targeting a
subset of customers and we're going to
do now the updates for multiple rows for
this subset. So that means we can run
this query. Let's go and execute it. Now
you can see two rows are affected. So
that means multiple rows got affected
got updated. So now if you go and query
our table customers you can see we don't
have any nulls inside the scores and we
have replaced all the nulls with a zero.
And of course you can do the same thing.
you can go and make an update command in
order to replace all the nulls in the
country to maybe something unknown or
any default value that you want. So this
is how you can update multiple rows in
one
go. All right my friends. So with that
we have learned how to insert new rows
to our tables and as well how to update
the content of already existing row. Now
the last thing or command that we can do
to the data inside the table that we can
go and remove rows from our table and we
can do that using the command delete. So
if you use delete SQL going to go and
start removing already existing rows
inside your table. All right. Now for
the syntax of the delete it's going to
be very simple. We're going to say
delete from and then we're going to
write the table name. And here comes
something very important. We have to add
a wear condition. And it's like the
update. If you don't do that, if you
don't include where condition, what
going to happen? You will end up
deleting all the rows inside the table.
So the syntax is very simple. Let's go
back to scale in order to delete some
data. Okay. So now we have the following
task. Delete all customers with an ID
greater than five. So now we have to go
and delete all the customers that we
recently added. So how we going to do
it? It's very simple. We're going to say
delete from. So that means I want to
delete something from a table. And we
have to specify the table name. It's
going to be the customers. So the syntax
is very simple. Now my friends, this is
more risky than updates because if you
execute it like this, don't do that yet.
Wait, what's going to happen? All the
data of the customers going to be
deleted. So you will get an empty table
and we will not do that. So now we're
going to do exactly like the update
command. We're going to specify the work
clause. So it says the ID should be
greater than five. So that means ID
higher than five. So with that we are
defining a subset of the data that
should be deleted, not everything. And
if we check in the updates, we have here
to do a double check before deleting
anything. So again what we do, we select
star from table customers and we're
going to go and copy the work condition
in order to test what going to be
deleted. So it's going to be all the
customers that is higher than five. And
with that I'm making sure that my delete
command is correct which is from what I
see here is correct. So those five
customers should be deleted. So now
let's go and delete those customers. And
now very important to read the message.
It says five rows affected. So that
means five customers got deleted. And
this is better than 10 of course. So
let's go and check what customers left.
So we have 1 2 3 4 5. Those are the
original customers. And everything else
got deleted. And with that we have
solved the task. And this is how we can
delete data from tables. Be very
careful. Always test before doing the
delete command. Okay. So now we have the
following task. And it says delete all
data from table persons. So that means
we have to go and drop everything from
the table persons. But we don't want to
delete the table. We just want to delete
the data inside the table now. So now
what we're going to do, we're going to
write delete from. And now we have to
specify the table persons. And if you
execute it, what's going to happen? SQL
going to go and drop all the data in the
persons. But in SQL, we have more
interesting command. If you want to
delete everything from the table
persons, we have that truncate.
Truncate. It is exactly like delete from
persons. It's going to go and make the
whole table empty. But why I like to use
truncate because it is way faster than
deletes. If you have large tables, the
delete command going to be really slow
because with the delete there is like a
lot of things happening behind the
scenes. There is like logs and
protocols. But if you are using trunk,
the database going to skip all those
extra stuff and it's going to be very
fast. So if you want to delete all the
data from table, you can do it like this
if it's like small table. But what I
usually do, I go and write truncate and
then table. we're going to get the same
effect and with that I'm saying reset
everything make the table empty. So
let's go and execute it and now with
that you will not get the number of
deleted rows and that's why it's
truncate it's way faster. It is not
protocoling anything it's not logging
anything it just go and delete all the
data without any extra steps. So this is
how we can delete all the data from a
table but the table still exists. Okay
my friends, so with that you have
learned the basics on how to manipulate
your data inside the database the data
manipulation language DML and with that
I can tell you we have covered the
basics of SQL. So with that we have
covered the beginner level. Now in the
next chapters we will be in the
intermediate level and the first thing
that you're going to learn in the
intermediate level you will learn how to
filter your data and we're going to
cover many operators that you can use
inside the workclass. So let's go.
All right. So now let's have an overview
about all different operators in SQL. So
the first group of operators we have the
comparison operators. They are the
easiest one where all what we have to do
is to compare two values and we have
like six different variants and how to
do that. Now to the next one we have the
logical operators. We use it in order to
combine multiple operators. And moving
on to the next one we have the range
operator. Here we have only one, the
between. We're going to use it in order
to check whether a value falls within a
specific range. Now moving on to the
next one, we have the membership
operator. And here we have two things.
We have the in operator or not in. Here
all what you have to do is to check
whether a value is in a list or not. And
the last category that we have is the
search operator. And here as well we
have only one operator that like we use
it in order to search for a specific
thing in a text. So my friends, we're
going to go through all those operators
one by one. Okay. So now let's go and
deep dive into the first category the
comparison operators and we're going to
cover all those stuff. So what is
exactly comparison
operator? Okay. So what is exactly
comparison operators? It is very simple.
We want to compare two things and there
is a lot of things that we can compare
in SQL. But the formula for that going
to be always like this. So we have the
first expression and then operator and
then we have another expression and this
going to form something called
condition. So here we have a lot of
variance. We can compare one column to
another column. So for example, you can
go and compare the first name with the
last name. So both of the expressions
are columns here. Another scenario, you
want to compare a column with a value, a
static value. Like for example, you say
the first name must be equal to a value
like John. So now we are comparing a
column with a value. It's not anymore
two columns. Now we have another
scenario where we want to apply a
function to a column and then compare
the results to maybe a value. So for
example, we apply the upper function to
the first name and then this must be
equal to a value like John with all the
letters in the uppercase. And one more
thing that you can compare you can write
an expression in one of the sides like
for example you can say if we multiply
price with the quantity it must be equal
to 1,000 for example. So here we have an
expression. We have multiple columns
included in one sides and the output of
this expression must be equal to 1,000.
And now the last one is going to be a
little bit more advanced and we're going
to cover that of course in other
chapter. We can include a whole query
the complete query to one of the sides
and we call this a subquery. So in one
of the sides you're going to write a
whole query select from where whatever
you want and you go and compare the
result of this query to for example a
value or a column. So as you can see in
a scale we can compare a lot of things
together. Either comparing the columns
together or a column with a value or we
use a function or an expression or even
a whole query. So this is how we build
conditions in SQL. Okay my friends. So
let's see how the conditions works in
SQL. So we have our data the name the
country the score and let's say that we
have built a condition where it says the
country must be equal to the USA. So
this is very simple comparison operator
and this is the condition that we are
using inside the work clause. So once
you apply this filter to your data what
going to happen? SQL going to go row by
row evaluating whether it is meeting the
condition. If it's not fulfilling the
condition then SQL going to remove it
from the results. But if it is
fulfilling the condition it's going to
keep it. So now we are comparing the
values of column together with a static
value the USA. So we're going to compare
whatever value we get from the country
together with the USA. So now let's see
how is going to apply this filter to our
data for the first customer Maria. Now
you can see the value inside the country
is Germany. So Isql now going to go and
compare Germany to USA since it is not
equal. Then is going to understand okay
Maria is not fulfilling the condition.
So it is false and is going to go and
remove this customer from the results.
So she is not fulfilling the condition.
Moving on to the next one to Joan. Now S
is going to take the value inside the
country the USA it is equal to USA. So
that means John is fulfilling the
condition and Isl going to be happy
about it. So it is true and this means
is going to keep Joan in the final
results. Now moving on to George the
value is UK not equal to USA. He is not
fulfilling the condition. Is going to go
and remove him from the final result.
Same thing for Martin. Germany is not
equal to USA. Is going to remove this
customer as well. And to the last one
bit better you can see the value is USA.
So USA equal USA. The condition is
fulfilled. SQL is happy about it and
going to leave the customer in the
output. So now if you go and apply this
condition using the comparison operator
to your data only two customers going to
be left in the output. This is exactly
how the conditions and the comparison
operators works in SQL. Okay. So now
let's start with the first operator.
It's very simple. We have the equal.
It's going to checks if the two values
are equal. That's very simple. Let's
have an example. Okay. So now we have
this task. It says retrieve all
customers from Germany. So this is very
basic. We're going to go and select and
we're going to select all the columns
since we don't have any specifications
from the table customers. And if you go
and execute it, you will get all the
customers. But we don't need that only
the customers that comes from Germany.
So we have to go and apply a condition
using the wear clause country equal to
the value Germany. So make sure you are
writing it exactly like in the database
otherwise it will not work. So let's go
and execute and with that we are getting
only the customers from Germany. So it
is very simple and this is why we use
the equal operator. Okay. So now moving
on to the next one again very simple. If
you want to check if two values are not
equal we can use the not equal operator.
So let's have an example. Okay. So now
we let's have the opposite task. It says
retrieve all customers who are not from
Germany. So this is very simple. We are
saying here who are not they are not
equal to Germany. So we can use the not
equal operator in order to get these
customers. So with that as you can see
after executing we are getting all the
customers country is not equal to
Germany and there's like another way on
how to do the not equal doing it like
this we'll get the same results. All
right my friends moving on to the next
one. We can check if a value is greater
than another value. So we use the
greater operator. Let's have an example.
Okay. So now the next task it says
retrieve all customers with a score
greater than 500. Now we want to filter
the data based on the score. So we're
going to say where score and now the
task says greater than 500. We're going
to use the operator greater than 500.
It's very simple. So with that we will
get only the customers where the score
is higher than 500. So for example Maria
it's not fulfilling the condition. The
same thing for the Peter and as well for
Martin it must be greater than 500. So
if you go executed you will get only
those two customers because they are
greater than 500. Okay, moving on to the
next one. This time we're going to check
if a value is greater than or equal to
another value. So it is like mix between
the greater than and the equal. If one
of them is fulfilled then the value
going to meet the condition. So let's
have an example for that. Now, if the
task says retrieve all customers with a
score of 500 or more, this time we're
going to go and include the customers
where their score is equal as well to
500 or higher. So, we're going to have a
similar condition based on the score and
the 500's value, but this time we're
going to say greater or equal to 500.
So, if you go now and execute it, this
time we're going to see the customer
Martin with the score of 500. So, in
this scenario, we're going to use
greater or equal. All right. Right. So
now let's keep moving. The next one is
as well very simple. We're going to
check this time if a value is less than
another value. So we're going to use the
less operator. Let's have an example.
Now moving on to another simple task.
Retrieve all customers with a score less
than 500. So this time we want all the
customers with a lower score. And we're
going to use exactly the opposite. It's
going to be the score is less than 500.
And again here it is not equal, right?
So if you go and execute, you will get
all the customers with a low scores. he
will not get to Martin because Martin is
equal to 500. So with that we have
solved the task. We have all the
customers with the score less than 500.
Okay my friends, now moving on to the
last one. I think you already got it. So
we're going to check whether a value is
less than or equal to another value. So
you can go and combine the less operator
together with the equal and if one of
them is fulfilled then the value going
to meet the condition. So let's have an
example for that. This time we are
retrieving all customers with a score of
500 or less. So the query going to be
very similar but we are saying it is
less or equal to 500. So we are
including the value in our condition.
And with that as you can see we still
have our two customers where we have the
score less than 500 but we have now as
well Martin with a score of 500. Okay my
friends. So with that we have covered
the first group the comparison
operators. Now we're going to move on to
the next group. We're going to speak
about the logical operators and here we
have three and or not. So let's start
with the first one. What is exactly and
operator. Okay. So now what is the
definition of the and it says all
conditions must be true. So all the
conditions that you have in the wear
clause must be true in order to keep the
row in the results. So let's understand
what this means. things going to get
more complicated where you can have not
only one condition but you might have
multiple conditions in your query. So
here we're going to add a second
condition where we're going to say not
only the country must be equal to USA
but also the score must be higher than
500. So now you have two conditions and
you have to put them in the wear clause.
Now you have to combine those conditions
using the logical operator and here we
have two options two operators the and
operator and the or operator. In this
scenario, if you say and then SQL is
very restrictive. Both of the conditions
must be true in order to keep the row in
the results. So now let's see how this
going to work. Now for the first row and
for the first condition you can see the
country is Germany and it is not
fulfilling the first condition. So this
going to be false. And as well if you
check the second condition for the first
row you can see the score is 350. So
that means this customer is as well not
fulfilling even the second condition. So
both of the conditions is false and it's
going to go I remove this customer from
the results. Now to the next one John
you can see John is fulfilling the first
condition because the country is equal
to USA and as well fulfilling the second
condition. His score is 900 and this is
higher than 500. So now SQL going to be
very happy about it because both of them
is true and this is the only way in
order to keep the row in the output
because we are using the operator and so
John going to stay in the output. Now
moving on to George. He is not
fulfilling the first condition. But now
the second condition is fulfilled. His
score is 750 and this is higher than
500. So now it's like 50/50 right. In
one side it's false but the other side
is true. But this is not enough for the
ant operator. Both of them should be
true in order to keep the result in the
output. That's why SQL going to remove
this row. Now moving on to Martin. He is
not fulfilling both of the conditions.
So SQL going to go I remove it from the
results. And now for the last one. Peter
is fulfilling the first condition. the
country is equal to USA but the second
condition is sadly not fulfilled so we
have the score zero not higher than 500
again we have the same scenario it's
50/50 and this is not enough for the ant
operator that's why SQL going to go I
remove it so as you can see if you use
an and operator a lot of rows going to
be removed if one of the condition is
not met so the ant operator is very
restrictive both of the conditions must
be fulfilled to keep the row in the
results so this is exactly how the and
operator works. Okay. So now we have the
following task. Retrieve all customers
who are from USA and have a score
greater than 500. So here we are like
combining multiple conditions and let's
go and do it step by step. So the first
thing that we have to go and select the
data from the correct table. So select
star from customers and with that we are
getting all the customers from the
table. Now the first condition we need
the customers that come from USA. So we
need only those two customers and in
order to do that as we learned we can go
and use the wear clause and the
condition going to be country equal to
USA. So if you go and execute we will
get those two customers. Nothing is new.
We have used the compression operator
equal. But we are not done yet. We have
another condition from those two
customers. We need only the customers
where their score is higher than 500. So
now by looking to those two customers
you can see we see that the bitter here
does not have a score higher than 500
and we don't want to see that in the
results. So now what we have to do we
have to go and write a condition for
this one over here. So this is based
this time on the scores not on the
country. So the score should be greater
than 500. Now as you can see we have the
first condition for the first one here
and the second condition for the second
requirement. Now the question how to
connect those two conditions. So here we
have two options and or and to be honest
this is very simple the task says it
customer should fulfill both of the
conditions should be from USA and as
well at the same time greater than 500.
So it is very simple real and so with
that we have connected both of those
conditions and if you go and query it
you will get only one customer that is
fulfilling our conditions. So from all
customers we have only one customer
that's fulfilled this condition that
comes from USA and at the same time the
score of this customer is higher than
500. So this is how we use the ant
operator in order to connect two
conditions. Okay my friends. So that's
all for the ant operator. Let's speak
now about the or
operator. All right. Now the or operator
it says at least one condition must be
true. So it is less restrictive than the
and it is enough to have one condition
true in order to keep the row in the
results. Let's understand exactly what
this means. Okay. So now we have the
same scenario. We have two conditions
and in SQL you have to connect them
either using the and operator or the or
operator. In this scenario we're going
to talk about the or operator. And as we
said at least one of the conditions must
be fulfilled in order to leave the
record in the results. So let's see
what's going to happen here. Now the
first customer Maria she is not
fulfilling the first condition and as
well the second condition. So both of
them is false and this is the only
scenario where SQL going to remove the
record from the results because it is
not fulfilling the minimum at least one
of them should be true. Both of them is
false then SQL going to go and remove
this row. Now moving on to the next one
to John. John is from USA and has higher
score than 500. Both of the conditions
is green. So both of them is true and
this is more than enough to keep the row
in the output. That's why we will see
John in the outputs. Now moving on to
the third one, George. George is not
fulfilling the first condition because
UK is not equal to USA. But John this
time is fulfilling the second condition.
So we have here true and since we have
at least one true, this is good enough
to keep the record in the output. So you
will see George in the results. Now
moving on to Martin. He is not
fulfilling the first condition as well
not fulfilling the second condition.
Both of them is false and this is not
enough to keep the result in the output.
So that's why it's still going to go and
remove it. Now moving on to the last
one. Peter he is fulfilling the first
condition but not the second condition
but still everything is fine because he
is fulfilling at least one condition. So
we have the minimum and it's still going
to leave it in the output. So as you can
see the or operator is not restrictive
like the and operator. It's enough to
have one true in order to keep the data
in the output. And this is exactly how
the or operator works. Now let's see the
second task. Retrieve all customers who
are either from USA or have a score
greater than 500. So it is a very
similar task. We have two conditions. So
we need the customers that are either
from USA. So it is based on this country
equal to USA. And the second condition
is the score is greater than 500. But
this time we are very relaxed. either
this condition is fulfilled or the
second one. So instead of having and we
will be using the operator or. So it is
enough to fulfill one of those
conditions. And if you go and execute
now as you can see we are getting more
results because it is easier to fulfill
the conditions. So we can see those
three customers either fulfilling the
first condition or the second one. All
right my friends. So that's all for the
or operator and we're going to move to
the last one in this group the not. So
what do we mean with the not operator?
Okay. So now what is this operator not?
It is a reverse operator. It's going to
go and exclude the matching values. So
what this exactly means? Let's have a
very simple example. All right. So now
the net operator is not like the or and
the ands. This operator will not go and
combine two conditions. So you can use
it with only one condition. And let's
say that our current condition is like
this. The country must be equal to USA.
So this is like a comparison operator.
And if you apply it to your data, as we
learned, it's going to leave only two
customers, John and Peter, because they
fulfill the conditions and all other
customers will be removed because they
don't fulfill the condition. So nothing
crazy so far. But now if you go and
apply the not operator to the condition,
what going to happen? You're going to
reverse the whole truth. So you are
saying if this condition is fulfilled,
it must be removed from the final
results. So it is switching everything.
We want to see the customers that is not
fulfilling the condition. So now let's
see what can happen if you apply the not
operator together with the condition. We
can see that the first customer is not
fulfilling the condition which is great
thing. This is exactly what we want. We
want the customer that is not fulfilling
the condition. That's why going to be
happy about it and SQL going to make it
true and leave it in the output. So
Maria is fulfilling the whole thing. She
is not meeting the condition. So SQL
going to leave it at the output. Now for
the next one. So this customer is
fulfilling the condition and that is not
a good thing. So SQL going to go and
this time remove John from the results
because he is fulfilling the condition.
And moving on to George. So George is
not fulfilling the condition which is
amazing. So that's why SQL going to keep
this time George in the output. The same
thing for Martin. Martin is not
fulfilling the condition. So Isl going
to keep the customer and better he is
fulfilling the condition. So SQL going
to go and remove this customer from the
output. So as you can see we have
reversed everything right. The not
operator going to make the true false
and the false true. Okay. So this is how
it works. Now let's go back to SQL in
order to practice. Okay. The next task
it says retrieve all customers with a
score not less than 500. So this sounds
really funny. As usual we're going to go
and select star from customers. And now
we have to filter the data based on this
condition. So the score is not less than
500. Well, you can go and say well the
score is higher, greater or equal to
500, right? And with that it is not less
than 500. So if you go and execute it,
we just solve the task, right? We get
all the customers that are not less than
500. Or you can go and use the not
operator to make things more funnier. So
you go over here and say it is not and
then you switch it. So you make like
this. So the score is less than 500. But
as we use here not then we twisted
everything. So we are saying the score
is not less than 500. And if you execute
it you will get the exact same results.
Convert the truth. If you remove it and
execute you will get everything that is
less than 500. But if you put the nut
you will convert the whole logic. So if
you go and execute you are not getting
the scores that are less than 500. So
this is really nice. This is how you use
the nut operator. Okay my friends. So
with that we have covered everything
about the logical operators. Now we're
going to move to the third group. We're
going to talk about the range operator.
And here we have only one the between.
So what is exactly between
operator? Okay. So what is between? It's
going to go and check if a value falls
within a specific range. So you have a
range and you are checking whether your
value is in the range or outside the
range. So let's understand exactly what
this means. Okay. So now in order to
build a range you need two things. You
need the lower boundary for the range
and you need as well the upper boundary.
Once you have two boundaries then you
have a range and everything between
those two boundaries going to be true
and everything outside those boundaries
going to be false. So now for example
let's say that we have the lower
boundary 100 and the upper boundary 500.
And there is one thing that you have to
understand about the between the
boundaries are inclusive. So that means
if a value is exactly 100 or exactly 500
then it's going to considered as a true.
So it is considered to be inside the
range. Now if you apply this filter to
our data where we say the score must be
between 100 and 500 going to go and do
the following. So for the first customer
Maria is going to go and check whether
her score is inside the boundaries. So
as you can see 300 is between 100 and
500. So she is in the green area and
that's why Isque going to be happy about
it and leave the customer in the
outputs. Now moving on to John. John has
900. As you can see 900 is greater than
500. So this value is going to be
outside the boundaries on the right side
and this means the score of John is not
in the range. That's why he is not
fulfilling the condition and SQL going
to go and remove this customer from the
results. Now moving on to George 750.
The same thing outside the range. SQL
will not accept it and remove this
customer from the final results. Now
moving on to Martin his score is 500 and
this is exactly at the boundary. So if
it's like 5001 it's going to be outside.
So since between is inclusive then SQL
going to accept it and Martin considered
to be in the range and fulfilling the
condition. So SQL going to keep him in
the final result. Now here are speaking
about better he has zero score and this
is less than 100. So in the left side
not in the range. So not fulfilling the
condition and SQL going to go and remove
him. This is exactly how between works
in SQL. It's very simple. Okay. So now
we have the following task and it says
retrieve all customers whose score falls
in range between 100 and 500. So let's
start as usual by selecting all data
from customers and execute it. Now the
task says everything. We need all
customers in a range. So we have a lower
value and a higher value. So in order to
do that as usual we're going to use the
where and then we're going to specify
the column that we want to filter on. So
it's going to be the score and since we
have like two boundaries we can go and
use the function between and we start
with the first boundary the lowest
boundary. So it is the 100 and 500 the
high boundary the upper boundary. So
between 100 and 500. So now let's go and
execute it. And with that we get only
those two customers because they are
between this window. Now there is
another way in how to solve this task by
not using between. We can go and use the
comparison operator together with a
logical operator and. So let me show you
how we can do that. I'm going to go and
copy the whole thing. And now we're
going to write two conditions. So first
the score should be higher or equal to
100 because the boundaries is inclusive
and the other one the score is less or
equal to 500. So this is the upper
boundary. So with that we have the two
conditions and we can go and connect
them using the and operator. So it's
like very similar to the between we have
an and between the upper and the lower
boundaries but we are using the
comparison operators. So it is higher or
equal to 100 and lower or equal to 500.
If you go and run this query you will
get exactly same results. Now if you ask
me which method is my favorite I'm going
to go with this method and I will skip
the between because each time to be
honest for me I forget about the between
whether the boundaries are inclusive or
exclusive. But if I read the script I am
going to see exactly that those
boundaries are inclusive because we have
here the equals. So I really prefer
using the compressor operator together
with the and then using between. So it's
up to you if you memorize it then go
with the between. But for me I'm going
to go with the compression operators.
Okay my friends. So that's all about the
between and the range operator. Now
let's move to another group. We have the
membership operator. So here we have
like two. We have the in and the not in.
So let's understand what this exactly
means. Okay. So what is in operator?
It's going to go and check if a value
exist in a list. So you have a list of
values and you are checking whether your
value is a member of your list. So let's
have very simple example in order to
understand what this means. Okay. So now
how this works exactly what you have to
do is to go and make a list of values.
So let's say that I have a list and
there I have specified two values
Germany and USA. So those two are the
members of this list. Now if you use the
n operator it's going to go and check
the value of countries whether it is in
the list or not. So let's do it one by
one. For the first customer Maria her
country is Germany and Germany is member
of the list. So it's going to be happy
and going to leave Maria in the final
results. Now moving on to John. John
comes from USA. USA is member of the
list. So he is fulfilling as well the
condition and you're going to see John
in the final results. Now we come to
George. George comes from UK and UK is
not member of our list. And SQL going to
go and remove this customer from the
final results not fulfilling the
condition. Now for the last two, Martin
and Peter, their country is a member of
the list and SQL going to go and leave
those customers in the final results. So
as you can see it's very simple. Or what
you have to do is to define the members
of a list and use the n operator and if
the value is a member of this list it's
going to be true otherwise it's going to
be false. Now of course the other
operator going to be exactly the
opposite where we say not in the list.
So we are searching for values that are
not in this list. So as we are using not
it's going to go and reverse completely
the truth. And if you apply this you
will get in the result only one
customer. you will get George and the
result because the country is UK and UK
is not a member of the list. So if you
use not together with the in operator
you will get exactly the opposite
effect. So this is how the in and the
not in operator works in SQL. Let's go
back to scale in order to practice that.
Okay. So now we have this task and it
says retrieve all customers from either
Germany or USA. Okay. So let's try to
solve this task. This going to be a
little bit tricky. So select star from
customers as usual and execute it. So
now we need in the results only customer
that comes either from Germany or USA.
So that means this customer over here
should be excluded from the result
because he come from UK. So how we going
to write it? It's going to be like this
maybe. So the first one going to be the
country is equal to Germany or the
country is equal to USA right something
like this. So if you go and execute it,
you will get in the output only the
customers that are either from Germany
or USA. And with that we have solved the
task, right? Well, there is another way
in order to solve this task which is
more clear and shorter using the n
operator. So now how we going to do it?
Let's go and get the whole thing in
another query. And now instead of having
equals and ors and so on, we're going to
use the in operator and then we're going
to have like two parentheses and then
inside it we're going to have a list of
values. So it's going to be the Germany
and then the second value going to be
USA like this. So we are saying country
should be in this list Germany or USA
and if it is like one of those values
then the condition is fulfilled. So now
if you go and execute this one over here
you will get the exact same results. So
my friends, if you notice that you are
repeating yourself in the wear condition
and you are just changing the value of
the condition, it is based on the same
column and you are connecting them using
the or then there is something wrong and
always think on this scenario to use the
in operator because this can be really
ugly once you have a lot of values. So
imagine in our database we have a lot of
countries and your query going to be
like something like this. So you are
keep repeating country equal or country
equal and so on. Instead of that you're
going to have a really nice list of
countries in one go. So this is as you
can see here it is easier to extend and
as well has better performance. So as
you can see we are repeating the same
thing but we are just changing the value
and we are connecting all those
conditions using the or in this scenario
go and use the in operator. All right my
friends. So that's all for the
membership operators. Now we're going to
speak about the last one the search
operator. And here we have only one the
like. And each time we're going to say
like, I'm going to remind you to like
this course. So let's
go. Okay. So now what is like operator?
You can use it in order to search for a
pattern in your text. So if you have
like a text or characters and you are
searching for a specific pattern inside
the text. So let's have an example in
order to understand exactly what this
means. Okay. So now if you don't have
yet cafe, go grab one because you have
to focus for this one. Now what we have
to do is to define a pattern in is
scale. In order to build a pattern we
have like two special characters. If you
use a percentage you are saying
anything. So I'm going to accept
anything. So it could be no characters
at all or only one character or many
characters. So I'm saying anything. Now
if you use an underscore you are
expecting to have exactly one thing like
one character or one number. So it is
exactly one. I know this sounds
complicated but with an example you can
understand this. And I can tell you the
percentage is way more famous than the
underscore. I rarely really use the
underscore. So now let's say that I
build the pattern like this. I say the
first character must be M and then
percentage. So here I'm saying in my
text the first character must be an M
and after the first character I really
don't care. It could be any character,
any number whatever. So this is the
pattern and now let's have few values in
order to say whether it's true or false.
So now if you have the value Mariam. So
now you can see the first character is
an M which is perfect. This is exactly
our pattern. The first character must be
an M. And then after the M we got like
four characters. So whatever it is
totally fine. We can say Maria is
fulfilling our pattern. And this is
exactly what we are searching for. This
value is fulfilling the condition. Okay.
Now moving on to the next value we have
m a. So here again the first character
is an M which is perfect. And after that
we have only one character a. Well we
have say percentage. So it could be
anything one character multiple
characters a number or whatever. So
that's why this value can match our
pattern and we will see it in the
outputs. Now moving on to the next value
we have only one m which is as well
totally fine because we are saying the
first character must be an M and then
followed with anything. Now moving on to
the last scenario we have Emma. Now this
is a problematic because the first
character is an E and in our pattern we
say it must start with M. So we don't
have that in this word. The first
character is an E. That's why this value
is not fulfilling our pattern and SQL
going to remove this value from the
final results. So this is exactly what
going to happen if you have this pattern
and those values. Now let's have another
scenario where you say you know what it
could start with anything but for me it
is very important the last two
characters it must be an I and N. So we
could start with anything but the last
two must be an I and N. So let's take
this value Martin going to go and check
immediately the last two characters. So
you can see we have an I and N and the
first part marks it is fine. It could be
anything. So this value is fulfilling
the condition because the last two
characters is an I and N. Now moving on
to the next one we have vin. So v i n
the last two characters is as well
exactly what we are searching for. It is
fulfilling the condition and we have
before it like only v. So we say
anything with a percentage. Right? Now
one more we have in. So it is as well
fulfilling the condition because before
it we don't have anything. So en is
fulfilling as well the condition. The
percentage is always saying anything.
Now moving on to the last scenario we
have Jasmine. They are not the last two
characters. The last two characters is
an N and E and this is not matching our
pattern and this why this value is not
fulfilling our pattern and you will not
see it in the results. So with that you
can understand how we can search for
something in a text using the like
operator. Let's keep going. Now let's
say that I have a percentage at the
start and percentage at the end and in
between I have only one character an R.
If you define it like this you are
saying if there is an R anywhere it is
good enough whether it's beginning or at
the end or in between then the condition
is fulfilled. So if you have Maria you
can see we have an R in the middle. So
in the left side we have two characters
on the right side we have two characters
doesn't matter the main thing we have an
R somewhere. So this going to be
fulfilling the condition. Now moving on
to better we have an R at the end and
that is totally fine cuz we say at the
right side it could be anything. So we
have an R somewhere that's why it's
going to fulfill the condition. Now we
have another case where we say Ryan we
have an R at the start. So we don't have
anything before and we have after that
like three characters which is totally
fine. So we don't really care about the
position of the R. It is totally
acceptable to have an R anywhere. And if
you have only an R that is as well good
enough. You don't have anything before.
you don't have anything after and that's
okay. But if you have a word like Alice,
we don't have any R inside it. So that's
why this is the only case where you say
we don't have here an R and it's going
to remove this value from the results.
And this way of searching of something
is very famous. You don't care about the
words before this word and after the
word, right? So if you are searching for
any word, you're going to say percentage
before and percentage after. Now I know
that we want to practice with the
underscore. So let's say that I have two
underscores and then the character B and
then a percentage. So here what I'm
saying there should be something in the
first position. There should be as well
something in the second position. Then
the third position should be the
character B must be exactly at this
position and after that it could be
anything. So we really don't care. I
know this is a little bit complicated.
Let's have an example. So we have the
value alert. Now we can see the first
position we have something the A. Then
the second position we have as well
something the L. So so far we are good
at the pattern and then the third
position we have B. So we have complete
match and the rest the ERT whatever. So
with that Albert is matching our
pattern. Moving on to the next one rope.
You can see the first character we have
something which is good. We have the R.
Then the second character we have an O.
So it's not empty. We have something.
And then the third one we have exactly
B. And after that we don't have anything
which is fine. So again this value going
to fulfill the condition. So moving on
to the next one. So it start with an A.
So we have something in the first
position. The second position we have as
well something the B. But now the third
character it is a problem. It is not P.
We have an E. So that's why it is not
following our pattern. And is going to
go and remove it. Now moving on to last
example we have an A and an N. So in the
first position we have something. The
second one as well. But the third one we
don't have anything. We don't have a B.
So that's why it's going to be removed.
So my friends I know that was a lot.
This is exactly how you build a pattern
for the like operator using the
percentage and the underscore. But the
percentage is more famous. So this is
exactly how it works. Let's go back to
scale in order to have some examples.
All right, let's start with this task.
Find all customers whose first name
starts with a capital M. So let's go and
start searching for those informations.
We're going to start as usual. Select
star from customers. And now we have to
go and build the filter logic. So we're
going to say where. Now we are searching
something in the first name. So we're
going to say first name. So that means
it is very important to start with an M
and then the rest it doesn't matter. So
we're going to use the like operator in
order to search. And we're going to have
our single quotes and we're going to
start with the M. And it doesn't matter
what comes after that. So for us it is
very important that the first character
is an M. Let's go and execute it. And
with that we got our two customers Maria
and Martin. And both of them starts with
an M. So with that we have solved the
task. It is very simple. Now we have the
following task. Find all customers whose
first name ends with an N. So let's go
first and select all the customers here.
And we need all those customers where
they are having an N at the end. So we
have John and as well Martin. So how we
going to do it? The same thing where
first name like since we are searching
but here we're going to change the
expression. So it must ends with an N as
a last character. So before that it
doesn't matter whether it is the first
character. So it could be anything but
the last character of the word should be
an N. So that's it. Let's go and
execute. And with that we got John and
Martin because the last character is an
N. It is very simple, right? It is all
about where we're going to place this
percentage. Okay. So now we have the
next task. Find all customers whose
first name contains an R. So here we
don't have like specifications whether
it is at the start or at the end.
Somewhere there should be an R. So if
you go and execute first without any
wear condition you can see here for
example Maria we have in the middle
somewhere an R George George as well
Martin and Peter at the end. So we have
a lot of names with an R. So how we can
search for that? We're going to stick
with the where first name like and here
our character going to be an R and we're
going to put before it and after it a
percentage. So it doesn't matter what is
before it or after it somewhere there
should be an R. So let's go and execute
it. And with that we got all our
customers where somewhere we have an R.
As you can see it is very simple. If you
put it before and after then you are
open for more results. And this is
usually used a lot in order to search
for a value inside your database. All
right. Now we're going to move to a
funny one. It kind of says find all
customers whose first name has an R in
the third position for some reason. I
don't know why. So let's go and execute
our customers here without any filter.
So it is for us very important to find
the customers where in the third
position we have an R like here for
example Maria the third character is an
R which is okay but with Peter over here
it is not the third character so it is
not fulfilling the condition. So how we
going to write that? It going to say
like this where the first name like but
we have to write it now from the start.
So the first position going to be an
underscore the second position going to
be as well an underscore and now in the
third position going to have an R. So
with that we make sure the third
position and an R and before it we have
two positions and now afterward it
doesn't matter what comes after that it
could be nothing or characters. So if
you go and execute it like this we will
get Maria and Martin and we will not get
Peter because the R is not in the third
position. So now if you don't do it
correctly with the underscores let's go
and remove one of them and execute. You
will get nothing because we don't have
any first name where the second position
is an R. So you have to be very careful
with this. All right my friends. So this
is how you search inside your values.
And with that we have covered all
different groups of operators that you
can use inside a wear clause. So with
that you have learned how to filter your
data using multiple operators that you
can use inside the wear clause. So you
can filter anything now in SQL. Now we
will move to very interesting topic. You
will learn how to combine your data from
multiple tables. And here we have two
main methods. The first one is SQL joins
and the second set operators. And they
are really big topics. So we're going to
first focus on the SQL joins. And here
we have a lot of things to cover. So now
we are talking about the core of SQL. So
let's
go. All right. So now we have two
tables, table A and table B. And the big
question here is how to combine those
two tables. What do we want exactly? Do
you want to combine the rows or the
columns? And now if you say I would like
to combine the columns then we are
talking about joining tables. So we're
going to use joins in SQL. So now let's
say that we are joining the table A with
the table B and we start from the table
A. So SQL going to take the columns and
the rows of the table A and SQL going to
call it the left table because we
started from there and then we join it
with the table B and SQL going to call
the second table as the right table. And
here what's going to happen? and SQL
going to take the columns and the rows
from the right table and put it side by
side with the columns and rows of the
table A. So we are like combining the
columns we are putting them side by
side. And now if you say you know what I
don't want to do that I would like to
combine the rows both of the tables
having the same columns. I just want to
stack them. So we are now talking about
another methods. It is called the set
operators. So here there is like no left
and right. So since we started with the
table A, the SQL going to take the
columns and the rows of the table A and
put it in the results. And then it's
going to go to the second table, table B
and it's going to take only the rows and
put it below the rows of the the table
A. So we are putting the rows beneath
each others. We are doing like
appending. So that means as we are using
the set operators, we are combining the
rows. Our table going to be longer but
with the joins we are combining the
columns side by side and we are getting
wider table. But now for each methods
there are different types. So now for
example in order to do the joints we
have four very famous types. We can do
an inner join, full join, left join,
right join. But of course there are more
than that but those are the basics. And
for the set methods we have as well
types. We have the union, union all
except and intersect. And for each
methods there are like different rules.
In order to join the tables we have to
define the key columns between the two
tables. Don't worry we're going to learn
about that later. This is the
requirement in order to join tables and
the requirement of combining tables
using the set operators the tables in
your query should has the exact same
number of columns but here you don't
need any like key in order to combine
the tables. So guys if you look at this
in order to combine two tables first you
have to decide do I want to combine the
columns or the rows. So first you have
to decide in the methods and after that
you have different types on how exactly
you're going to go and combine the data
and of course there are rules that you
have to follow. Now, of course, we're
going to go and cover everything in the
course, but now in this section, we're
going to learn how we're going to
combine the tables using the SQL joins.
So, we're going to go and dive into this
word. All right. So, now what is exactly
SQL joins? Now, let's say that we have
two tables. On the left table, we have
the customer name. So, we have four
customers. And on the right table, we
have the country informations about the
customer. And now we would like to query
both of those informations the names and
the countries. Now in order to query
those two tables in one query first we
have to connect them. And in order to
connect those two tables we need a key a
column that exist on the left and on the
right sides. And by looking to this the
common column here is the ID of the
customer. Now once we connect those ids
together we will be able to query those
tables together and SQL going to start
matching those ids. So for the ID number
one, we will get the name Maria and the
country Germany. And the ID2 is
connecting John to USA. And now you can
see the ID3 is not connectable. So we
cannot connect it to the right side. But
for the ID4, we can use it in order to
connect Martin to Germany. So this is
exactly what happens if you join two
tables. You connect those two tables
using a common column, a key like the
ID. And once we have matching value, we
can connect the two rows together. So
this is what we mean with SQL
joins. Now you might ask why do we need
actually joins? Well, the first and very
important reason is to recombine your
data. So now usually in databases the
data about something like the customers
could be spreaded into multiple tables.
Like we could have table called
customers, another one where we have the
customer addresses and a third table
where you can find the orders of the
customers and maybe another one where
you can find the reviews of the
customers. So as you can see the data of
the customers is spreaded into like four
tables. Now how about I would like to
see all the data about the customers in
one results. So I would like to see the
complete big picture about our
customers. What we can do, we can go and
connect those four tables using the SQL
joins. And once we do that in one query,
I will be able to combine all those
tables in one big results. And this is
the most important reason why we use SQL
joins in order to combine all the data
about specific topic in order to see the
big picture. Now, another reason why we
use SQL joins is to do data enrichment.
It is where I want to get an extra data
and extra information. So let's say that
you are querying the table customers and
this is your main table the master
table. So you are able to see all the
data that you need but sometimes what
happens you would like to get an extra
information from another table like for
example the zip codes of the countries.
So you would like the help of another
table we call it a reference table or
sometimes lookup table where there is
like one extra information that you
would like to add it to your master
table to the primary source of your
data. So now what we can do we can join
those two tables in order to enhance our
table. So we are getting one extra
relevant informations for the customers
and this process we call it data
enrichments. I'm getting an extra data
for my main table. So this is another
reason why we use joins. All right. So
now so far we have used joins in order
to get the data from two tables. But now
there is another use case for the SQL
joins. We use it in order to check the
existence of your data in another table
or maybe as well the not existence. So
let's say that I have a table called
customers and I'm working with this
table and doing queries. But now I would
like to check something. I would like to
check whether our customers did order
something. Now in order to check that I
need the help of another table for
example the table orders. So that means
I'm using the table orders only for my
check. So I don't want to get any extra
data from the orders in my final
results. I'm just using the table orders
and we call in this table a lookup. So
now what we can do we can connect those
two tables together. And now based on
the existence of the customers inside
the second table the orders either the
customer going to stay in the final
results or going to be removed. So that
means I'm filtering the data based on
the join. And of course I can check as
well the net existence. I would like to
see in the final results all the
customers that didn't order anything. So
it is the same scenario. So my friends,
those are the main three reasons why you
use SQL joins. First, if you want to
combine the data from multiple tables in
one big picture. So I use join in order
to get the data from different tables.
The second use case, you are working
with one table but you would like to get
an extra information from another table.
So you are doing it like something
called data enrichments. And in the
third scenario, we don't want to combine
the data. We want just to join it with
another table in order to do a check to
check the existence of your records in
another table. So this is why we need
joins in
SQL. Now there is like a lot of
different possibilities on how to join
tables, how to join the data. Now in
order to make it easy to understand,
we're going to visuals as like two
circles. So we have the table A and a
table B. The table A is on the left
side. We call it the left table. And the
table B going to be on the right side
and we call it the right table. The side
of the tables is very important. Now if
you combine those two circles, you will
get three different possibilities. The
circles going to overlap. And here
exactly where we can have the matching
data between the two tables. So the data
is available on the left and on the
right. Or another possibility you want
to get all the data from one of the
tables. So you can get all the rows from
one circle. And the third possibility
you want to get only the unmatching data
from one table. So if something exists
in one table but not in the other table
then we call it unmatching data. So
those are the three scenarios that you
have to ask yourself once you are
combining tables and this can generate a
lot of join types. So here we have like
basic SQL joins those are the classical
one and here depends on the scenario
whether you want only matching all or
all the rows from either left or right
and we have advanced SQL joins where we
focus on the unmatching data. Now we're
going to go and cover all those types
one by one. So we're going to start
first with the basics and the first
option that you have is to get all the
data without joining tables. So let's
see what this means.
So what do we mean with no join? Well,
we want to returns the data from two
tables without combining them. So
actually this is not a joint type
because we are not combining anything.
We just want to query the data from two
tables. So that means from the table A
we want to see all the rows everything
and from the table B we want to see
everything as well all the rows. So that
means we want to see two results and
there is no need to combine them. So
let's see the syntax of that. So all
what you have to do is very simple.
Select star from table A and then
semicolon and then start another query.
Select star from table B. So that's it.
And of course since we are not combining
the data there will be no join in the
syntax. So that's it. Let's go to SQL in
order to do that. Okay. So now we have
the following task. It says retrieve all
data from customers and orders in two
different results. So that sounds that
we don't have to go and combine the
tables together. And all what we can do
is the following. We can go and select
the data from the first table like this
and then we make another query for the
second table the orders and we don't
have to go and combine them in one big
query. We just use a very simple select
statements in order to retrieve the
data. So if you go and execute it since
you have two separate queries you will
get two results and with that in one
result you will get all the customers
and in the other result you will get all
the orders and the data is not combined
at all. So this is how you query two
tables without combining them. So with
that we are getting all the data without
joining the tables. Now we're going to
start talking about the first type of
join the inner join where we start
combining the data from two tables. So
let's
go. Okay. So now what is exactly an
inner join? So this type going to return
only the matching rows from both tables.
So that means we will see in the output
only matching rows. So now what do we
need from the left table? We want only
the matching data. So we will not get
the whole circle of A. We will get only
where we have an overlapping with the
table B. So we want to see the data from
A only if it exists in the table B. And
now what do we need from the table B?
Exactly the same thing only the matching
data. So that means I don't want to see
all the data from B. I want to see only
the data in B that has a match from the
table A from the left side. And with
that you will get only the matching data
from both tables. Now let's see how we
can write that in SQL. So it is a usual
query and always we start with a select.
So we select for example all the columns
from and here we specify the table name.
So it's going to be a. So so far nothing
new. But now we want to add as well the
table B in the same query. In order to
do that we use the keyword join and then
we say table B the name of the table.
And since we have like different types
of joins in SQL, you can specify the
type of the join before the keyword
join. And if you don't specify anything,
the default type is inner join. But my
friends, the best practices is always
mention the type. I don't like to skip
the defaults because in projects maybe
not everyone is aware of the defaults.
So don't skip that. Always specify the
type. So now what we're going to do,
we're going to put the keyword inner
before the join. And with that SQL going
to know how to deal with the rows
between two tables. But still we are not
done there. We have to tell SQL how to
combine the tables. And with that we use
the keyword on. And after that you
specify the join condition. And as we
learned in order to join two tables we
have to find out a common column in
order to match the data. Right? And
usually in scale they are the keys or
ids. So the condition can be like this.
the key from the table A must be equal
to the key from the table B. So this is
the join condition and using this join
SQL can go and start matching the data
from the left table and the right table.
And there is one thing that is very
important while you are joining the
tables you have to understand about the
order of the tables in your query. Now
in the inner join the order of the
tables doesn't really matter. So whether
you start from A or you start from B it
doesn't matter because you will get the
same results. Both of the tables has the
same priority and it doesn't matter
where we start whether we say from A
join B or we say from B join A we will
get the exact same results. So in the
inner join you don't have to worry about
the order of the tables. So that's all
about the inner join. Now let's go back
to scale in order to practice. Okay. So
now we have the following task and it
says all customers along with their
orders but only for customers who have
placed an order. So my friends that
means we need the data from the
customers and from the orders from two
tables and we have to put everything in
one results. That means we have to join
two tables. Now let's go and do it step
by step. So we're going to go and say
select star from customers and then we
have to go and join it with the orders.
We're going to say join orders. Now you
have to go and specify the join type. Is
it inner, left, full and so on. Well
that's depend on the task. It says we
want all customers but only for
customers who have placed an order. So
there is like condition right here. We
don't want to see everything from the
customer. We just want to see only the
matching data only if the customers has
an order in the orders table. And for
that we can go and use the inner join.
Of course if you can leave it like this
you will get the same effects but I'm
going to go and specify it like this
inner join just to make it clear. We are
speaking about the inner join. And after
that we have to go and specify the join
condition. So we have to go and find a
common column between the customers and
the orders. So how I usually do it I go
and explore both of the tables. So I'm
going to go and select everything from
customers and as well
everything from the orders. So let's go
and execute. Now we're going to start
searching where do we have a common
column between those two tables. So we
have the from the first table first
name, country score and you don't find
any of those informations in the second
table. The only one is the ID. So the ID
of the customer and the ID of the
customer you can find it in the orders
the second column here. So this is the
common column between those two tables.
And usually in databases we create ids
exactly for this in order to connect
tables. So it's really rarely that we're
going to use like a country or score or
first name in order to join tables. We
usually use the ids. So let's go back to
our query and use those two columns. So
it's going to be the ID from the
customers equal to the customer ID. So
that's it. With that we have the
condition we have decided on the type
and we can go and execute it. Now you
can see we are getting only three
customers. Right? If you don't apply the
inner join we can see that we have five
customers. So that means actually we
have two customers without any orders
any matching data from the other table.
And as well you can see very nicely we
have now not only the columns from the
customers but as well all the columns
from the orders side by side. So with
that we have combined the data and as
well with that we have solved the task
but we will not leave our query like
this because it is not really good
practices. What we have to do is to go
and select only the columns that really
make sense in our query because in many
cases in your tables you will have a lot
of columns that is not needed like for
example if you check here you see we
have the customer ID here and as well
the customer ID over here. So it's like
repetition and it's enough to see it
only once. So what you have to do is to
go and pick few columns that we want.
For example, I'm going to start with the
ID maybe the first name and that's all
from the first table. Let's go and get
the order ID and I don't want the
customer ID again. So from the second
table I'll get add the sales. So let's
go and execute it. And with that you can
see very nicely the customer's name and
their orders with the sales. And now
comes something very important.
Sometimes if you have two tables you
might have columns that having the same
names. Like imagine the order ID in the
table orders it's called ID. So that
means we have the same name in both
tables and this kind of makes SQL very
confused. And here you will get an error
tells you I really don't know what do
you mean with the ID. Is it from the
table customers or from the orders? So
we have to tell SQL exactly from which
table did this column come from. So in
SQL in order to do that what we do
before the column name you write again
the table name the customers and then
you make a dot and now we are telling
SQL this column the ID it comes from the
table customers and SQL will not be
confused about it and it's going to go
and get the ID from the customers. And
for the second id you can go over here
and as well before it you say orders do
id so that knows okay this ID come from
the orders and the other one comes from
the customers and it is always good
practice especially if you are joining
tables to always assign for each column
a table because after a while if you
open your query and you see okay the
sales does the sales come from the
customers or the orders and if you have
a long list of columns it's going to be
really confusing so that's why we
consider it best practices if you always
assign for each column the table name
especially if you are doing joins. So
it's going to be like this. But of
course if you have like only one table
it's clear that all the columns in the
select comes from this table. But since
here we are dealing with multiple tables
it is good to show it like this. And of
course here we don't have the ID. We
have the order ID and the same thing for
the join condition. So the ID from here
comes from the customers and the
customer ID come from the orders. So now
it is clear for everyone which column
come from which table. But now you might
say you know what each time I have to
write the customers this is very long
name and sometimes in real projects
you're going to see tables that has
really long name and it's going to be
really annoying to add it each time
before each column right so instead of
that we can go and assign aliases for
the tables but only for the columns so
usually we go over here and say as and
maybe you can go and use only one
character like the first character C.
And now instead of saying customers you
can go over here and say C. The same
thing for the second column and as well
over here. And you can use now the C in
everywhere in your query. The same thing
for the orders. You can go over here and
say has O. And now instead of orders you
say
O on here. And now it is very easily to
see those two columns comes from the C
that means the customers and those two
columns comes from the O the orders.
Those are the best practices as you are
joining tables together in SQL. And of
course with that we have solved the
task. And about the order of the tables,
it doesn't matter where do you start. So
for example, if you take the orders here
and put it in the join and get the
orders in the from. So I just switch the
tables and execute it, you will get the
exact same results. So if you are doing
inner join between two tables, don't
worry about the order of the tables.
Okay. So now let's go and instant
exactly how executed the inner join.
Okay. So now again here we have our
query. Then we have the two tables
customers and orders. And here we have
the ID where we are joining the data. So
this is the ID from the table customers
and this is the customer ID that we have
in the orders. Now let's see how SQL can
execute this. So we are saying I would
like to see the ID and the first name.
So we will get the ID, the first name
from the table customers and we would
like to get the order ID and as well the
sales from the table orders. So our
result going to focus on those four
columns. Now the data should be joined
between those two tables using the inner
join and SQL going to start from the
left table from the customers because we
say from customers. So it's going to
start matching the ID from the left
table with the right table. So it's
going to say okay is there a match from
the first record from the first order?
Well yes it is the same ID and then SQL
going to say okay that condition is
fulfilled and we are allowed to see the
data. So the data will be presented in
the output. So we're going to have the
ID Maria and the order ID from Maria and
the sales of this order. So there is a
match. Then SQL going to go to the
second record. Well, we don't have a
match. The third we don't have match.
And so on for the last one. So we have
only one match for this ID. Then SQL
going to go again to the customers and
pick the second one and start matching
again with the first order. Do we have a
match? Well, no. Then it's going to go
to the second. Well, now we have a
match. So SQL going to be happy. the
condition is fulfilled and we will see
the results. So we're going to see the
first name and as well the order
information for this customer in the
output. It's going to keep searching. So
we don't have a match as well here. So
that's it. Now for the third customer as
well from the start there match no to
the second to the third and here we have
a match. So it's going to go and show
this informations since there is a
match. So the customer three George with
the order from this customer order ID
and the sales as well in the output. Now
it's going to go and keep continuing the
search. Well, we don't have any match.
Then it's still going to go to the
fourth customer and start matching. Do
we have here an ID? Do we have here a
match? Well, no. Then the second, third,
and fourth. We don't have any order for
this ID. There is no match at all. And
since we are saying inner join then SQL
will not allow to show the data of this
customer in the results. There is no
match and SQL going to totally ignore
this customer. Then we're going to go to
the last one and start as well matching
this ID with the orders. Well, there is
no match as well. SQL going to go and
exclude this user from the results. So
this is exactly how the inner join
works. it start from the left side and
start matching the data on the right
side and only if there is match the
result going to be presented in the
output and this is exactly why we are
getting this results and how the inner
join works. So now if you look again to
the reasons why we are joining tables we
can say we can use the inner join in
order to recombine the multiple tables
into one big picture. So the first use
case and as well we can use the inner
join in order to filter the data. So
since we are saying only the matching
data that means we are filtering the
data we are checking the existence of
the records in another table. So you can
use inner join either to combine data
from multiple tables or you can use it
as well only for filtering purposes only
to check the existence of your rows. So
this is usually the two use cases of
inner. All right. So that's all about
the first type the inner join. Next
we're going to talk about the left join.
So we're going to focus on the left
side. So let's go.
Okay. So now what is exactly left join?
This type going to returns all the rows
from the left table and only the
matching from the right table. So now if
you look again to our two circles A and
B. What do we need from the left table?
We want to see everything all the rows
all the data. So that means we will get
a full circle. And now from the right
table we want to get only the matching
data. So that means we don't want to see
everything from the table B. We want to
see only the records that has match to
the table A. So that means my friends
the left table has here more priority.
This is the primary source of your data.
The main source we cannot miss anything.
This is very important. We want to see
all the data. But from the table B, it
is a secondary source of data and we are
joining it only to get an additional
data. So I don't want everything. I want
only the data that has matched to the
lift table. So this is what we mean with
a lift join. Now if you look to the
syntax it's going to be very similar to
the inner join. So we start from the
left table the A. Then we say left join
the right table B and then the same
condition using keys. So here we just
switch the type. Instead of inner we
have now left. But now here with the
syntax we need to be very careful. The
order of the tables now is very
important. You have to start from the
correct table. So you have to mention
the left table exactly in the from
clause and then you join it with the
right table. So in the join you have to
specify the right table. If you don't do
it like this then you will not get all
the data from a and you will not get the
results that you are expecting. So this
is what we mean with the left join.
Let's go back to scale in order to
practice. All right. So now we have the
following task. It says get all
customers along with their orders
including those without orders. So again
here we need the data from two tables
the customers and orders and we want
everything in one result. So that means
we have to go and join the data. And now
the task says includes those without
orders. So that means I want to see
everything the matching data and the
unmatching data from the table
customers. And by looking to our query
this is not working because we are not
getting everything right. We are getting
only the customers that has match in the
table orders. And this is not of course
fulfilling the task. So now if you read
the task you can understand the main
table here is the customers. We are not
speaking about to see all the orders and
not missing any order and the orders
here is only for additional
informations. So now in order to not
lose any data for the customers we make
sure we start from the table customers.
So that means now the customers on the
left side and now after that instead of
inner join this is not good thing for
this task. We're going to say left join
and with that we guarantee we will get
all the data from the customers. Now we
say left join orders and of course the
condition going to stay like this. This
is how we are connecting the two tables.
So actually that's it. Let's go and
execute it. And now by looking to the
result you can see that we have now five
customers even the customers that didn't
place any orders. So you can see Martin
and Peter they don't have any order ID.
So that means they didn't order
anything. And as you can see is showing
us nulls when there is no match. So with
that we have solved the task. Now my
friends one more thing as I told you the
order of the tables is very important
because the customer is now the left
table because you start from it and the
second table the orders is the right
table. Now if you go and switch them
like this. So we start from the orders
and then join it with the customers and
you go execute it you will not get all
the customers and of course the task is
now not solved. So as you can see you
are getting now completely different
result if you go and switch the tables.
So be careful where you start and how
you join the tables in order to get the
effects that you want. All right. So now
I'm going to put everything back like
before. Now let's go and understand how
is exactly executed this query. Okay. So
now again we have the data from
customers and orders and this time we
are doing the lift join. So now let's
see how is going to do it. So going to
say okay we need the ID and the first
name and we will get that as well in the
results and from the right table we need
only those two informations the order ID
and the sales in the output. So those
are the columns that we need. So now SQL
in the left join going to do it a little
bit differently. It's going to start as
well from the lift table from the
customers. But this time going to go and
immediately put the result in the output
without like trying to match anything
and to check whether the data exist or
not because it doesn't matter not doing
any validation whether the customer
exist in the orders. Since it's lift
join is still going to show all the data
from the lift table. So there will be
like no check. But now as a next step in
order to get the order ID and the sales
SQL will start searching. So SQL going
to go over here and start searching
where do we have a customer with this
ID? Well, it's going to be the first
order. We're going to get the order ID
and as well the sales informations and
we will see that in the output. So
that's it for the first one. Now it's
going to go to the second row and the
same thing going to happen immediately.
The SQL going to go and put the result
in the output without checking anything.
And then in order to get the order data,
it will start searching for this ID. So
we have it here in the second row. We
have the order ID and the sales. And
it's still going to put those results to
the output. So the search for the third
one immediately going to put everything
in the output. And then start searching
for orders with this ID. We have it over
here. So this order belongs to the user
ID number three. So far we are getting
the same result as the inner joint. But
we are not done yet. Now exactly count
the difference this guy going to go and
get Martin and put it immediately in the
output and start searching for an order
with this ID. So do we have any order
with the ID number four? Well, we don't
have anything this time. SQL of course
will not go and exclude the ID number
four. It's going to leave it. But in SQL
if there is no match, we still have to
have something in the output. So SQL
going to go and say the output going to
be null like this. We don't know it is
unknown. And the same thing for the
sales. So in the lift join if there is
no match you will see nulls. The same
thing for the next customer for better.
So SQL will go and put the result
immediately in the output and then start
searching the orders. So do we have
anything for the ID number five? We
don't have anything. That's why SQL
going to go and present nulls as well in
the output. And that's why you saw nulls
in the output because those customers
don't have any orders. So this is
exactly the effect of the lift join. you
will get everything from the lift table
and only the matching stuff on the right
side and if there is something not
matching you will get nulls. So that's
it is this is how scale execute the left
join okay so now back to this use cases
of joins if I think about lift join I
can use it in order to recombine data in
order to build this big picture and as
well in the second use case where we use
it in order to get an extra information
from another table. So we have a main
table and secondary table. So we use it
for both use cases and as well in the
third use case only with a twist that
we're going to learn later. So that's
all about the left join. Now we have
another type that is exactly the
opposite of the lift join. We have the
right join. So now let's understand what
this
means. Okay. So now what is exactly
right join? This is the total opposite
of the left join. So this tag going to
returns all the rows from the right
table and only the matching from the
left table. So here the main table the
main focus is the right table. So SQL
going to get you all the rows everything
from the table B the right table but
from the left side we will get only the
matching data. So that means in the left
sides you will get only the data that
has a match on the right side and with
that the right table going to be the
primary the main source of your data. So
it is very important table but the lift
table is not that important. You are
just joining it in order to get
additional data. So again about the
syntax it's not that crazy. All what you
have to do is to change the join type.
So instead of left you say right join
and again here the order of the tables
is very important because the side here
makes a difference. So we start from the
left table A and then right join it to
the table B. So it sounds very similar
to the left join. We are just switching
things. Now let's go back to scale. in
order to practice. Okay my friends, so
now we have the following task and it
says get all customers along with their
orders including orders without matching
customers. So again we have the
customers and the orders and we are
doing the join but here the condition is
different. We want to see all the orders
even if they don't have a matching
customer. So that means I would like to
see everything from the table orders and
the customers table here is only like
supporting and helping. So the main
table that we are focusing on is in the
orders. We want to see everything and
from the customers only the matching and
if you are looking currently to the
results you can see we are seeing only
three orders right but in the original
table if you go back over here you can
see that we have four orders. So we are
currently using this query not seeing
all the orders. So now how we going to
solve it? If you start from the table
customers you can say you know what
instead of left join we're going to say
right join. And with that you're going
to guarantee you will get everything
from the table orders. But now the left
table the customers is not that
important and you will see the data of
the customers only if there is a match.
So doing the right join like this
guaranteed to see everything whether
there is match or no match. Now if you
go and execute it you can see on the
right side the order ID and the sales
and we can see now all the orders and on
the left side the ID and the first name.
We are seeing only the customers if they
did order something. And for the orders
without a known customer, we are getting
nulls. So with us, you have solved the
task using the right join. So now my
friends, you have to go and solve this
task to get the exact same results. But
you are allowed to use only the left
join. So you are not allowed to use the
right join. So now go pause the video,
solve the task and meet you
[Music]
soon. Now my friends, in SQL there is
always alternatives on how to solve a
task. So now if you want to get all the
data from B and only the matching from
A, you can do it like we have done using
the right join. But if you go and switch
the sides and you make the table B as a
left table and the table A as a right
table, you can do that of course in SQL.
But you have to switch the join type. So
instead of right, we have to use left
now since the B table now on the left
side and as well you have to switch the
order. So you start from the B table and
then you say left join the A table. and
of course the same join condition. And
if you do that, you will get the exact
same result as the left query. So if you
just switch the tables and as well
switch the join type, you can get the
same results. And to be honest, my
friends, I don't like the right join.
It's just in the last 10 years, I always
tend to start from a table and then use
a left join. And from my point of view,
the left join is way more famous than
the right join. And I think I never used
a query where I'm using a right join. So
my advice for you always try to skip the
right join and stick with the left join
just get the order of the tables in the
query correct and you will get the same
results. So with that you know an
alternative for the right join. Now all
what you have to do is to go and switch
the right to left. Uh this is not enough
because if I go and execute it. So now
all what I have to do is to go and
switch the tables like this. So we start
from the table orders because I want to
see everything from the orders and then
lift join it with the customers. And of
course we don't have to change anything
here. It doesn't matter the order
because we have an equal operator here.
What is very important here is where you
start from which table and what is the
table that you are joining with. So if
you go and execute it, you will get the
exact same results. So now I'm seeing
all the orders. I'm not missing anything
and only the matching customers. And I
prefer this way solving this task
instead of using the right join. All
right. So that's all about the right
join. Next we're going to combine
everything. We're going to talk about
the full join. So let's
go. Okay. So now what is exactly a full
join? If you use it, SQL returns
everything all the rows from both
tables. So now if you check again our
circles from the left table, we want to
get everything all the rows. So you will
get the whole circle and as well from
the right table you want to get
everything all the rows the whole
circle. So that you want to get
everything the matching the unmatching
all the data from left and right. Now
let's check the syntax. It's going to be
very simple. The joint type here going
to be a full join. And the full join it
is very similar to the inner join. You
remember the order of the tables is not
important at all. So there is here no
main table and secondary table. Both of
the tables are important and it doesn't
matter in your query where you start.
You can start from A full join B or you
can start from B then full join A. you
will get the exact same results. It
sounds simple. Let's go to SQL and
practice the full join. All right. So
now we have the following task and it
says get all customers and all orders
even if there is no match. So now again
we need the data from customers and
orders. But now of course which type
we're going to use? It says even if
there is no match but it didn't say no
match from orders or customers. So you
can understand from this task we are not
focusing only on the orders or the
customers. Both of them are equally
important and we need all the data. So
that means we need all the data from
left, all the data from right and we can
go and use the full join. So now we have
this query over here. We are starting
from customers and then joining to
orders. But now instead of having left,
we're going to say full join. So now
let's go and just execute it. Now if you
are looking to the left side, you can
see we are getting all the customers,
right? So we have our five customers and
if you are looking to the right, you can
see all our orders. So with that we have
everything from left and everything from
right and the matching data is just side
by side in the results and if there is
no match we are getting nulls. So
actually with that we have solved the
task and again it doesn't matter how you
start. You can start from the orders and
then join it to the customers and you
will get the exact same results. So you
are getting exactly the same data. Now
let's go and understand exactly how is
executed the full join. Okay again we
have the data of the customers and the
orders and our full join. So now we're
still going to identify those columns
that we want to see in the results. So
the ID and the first name, the order ID
and the sales informations to the
output. Now it's still going to start
from the left table since it is started
with the customers. It's still going to
take simply everything from the left
table and present it in the output.
Since it is full join, we want to see
all the data from the left side. And now
start searching for matches from the
right table. So let's start with the
first customer. And as usual, we will
get the order from the customer number
one. And the same thing for the second
customer, we have as well here match. So
we will get as well. It's like that lift
join. And for the third one, we have as
well a match. And we're going to have it
like this. And since we don't have
orders for those two customers, we will
get as well nulls in the outputs. So
scale going to mark it with null. The
same thing over here. And as well for
the last customer. So we will get nulls
for those two customers. And now of
course SQL will not stop here otherwise
we will get a left join effect. Now SQL
going to start looking at the right side
to find any order that is not in the
output. So SQL going to see okay the
first order is in the output. The second
one is as well in the output. The third
but the fourth one is not in the
results. So SQL going to take this
result and put it in the output. So this
order has no match at all from the left
side. And with that if you are looking
to the right side you can see SQL going
to be happy because we have all the
orders from the right table. And of
course SQL will not leave it like this.
Instead of that SQL going to show nulls
on the left side. So there is no ID and
there is no first name. So this is
exactly why we got this results. And
this is how SQL executed the full join.
Okay. Okay. So now if you are looking to
the use cases I can say you can use the
full join in order as well to recombine
the data from multiple tables if you
don't want to miss anything from all
four tables all data the matching and
unmatching data but I don't use it
usually for data enrichment for the
second use case and where we can use the
full join is in the last use case as
well but with a little twist that we're
going to learn later. So this is mainly
where we can use the full join. All
right. So with that we have covered the
basic types of joins inner, left, right
and full join. Those are the classical
joins on how to combine two
tables. Now we're going to start talking
about the advanced SQL joins. And now
we're going to cover the first part the
lift anti- join. So let's see what this
means. Okay. So now what is exactly a
lift anti- join? Now in this mechanism
we want to return rows from the left
side the left table that has no match in
the right table. So now by looking to
our two circles from the left table we
want to see only the unmatching rows. So
only rows that exist in table A but it
don't exist in the table B. So if there
is like matching data we don't want to
see it. And now from the right table we
don't want anything. We don't want any
data. So that means the only source of
your data going to be the left table.
And from the right table we don't need
any data. We are just joining the tables
to do a check to filter the data. So now
for the syntax this can be interesting.
We don't have a special type called left
anti- join. At least in the SQL server
we still can create this effect. Since
we are saying left we can use the type
left join and then as usual the join
condition with the keys. But now if you
leave it like this you will get the
effect of the lift join. And we don't
want that because with the lift join you
will get the complete circle from the
lift table. But now in order to remove
the matching data this overlapping in
the middle what we can do we can use a
filter and in order to filter the data
we use the wear clause. So now in order
to get rid of the matching data we can
take the key from the right table and we
say the key must be null. So if the key
is null so that means there is no match
on the right side. And if you do it like
this you will get the effect of the left
anti-join only the data in the left that
has no match on the right. So now let's
go in scale and create this effect.
Okay. So now we have the following task
and it says get all customers who
haven't placed any order. So now by
looking to this query clearly we are
focusing on the table customers but we
want to see the customers that didn't
order anything. So they are in our
database but the customers are inactive.
Now there are like different ways on how
to solve this task but we're going to
solve it using the joins. Now let's go
and start by just writing a very simple
query where we are selecting everything
from the table customers. Now you can
see this is our five customers. And now
I want to check which of those customers
didn't order anything yet. Now since we
are talking about the orders, we can go
and join it with the table orders. So
we're going to say lift join the table
orders as all and then we're going to go
and connect the tables using the ids
with the customer ID. So now if you go
and execute it now we are still seeing
all the customers because we are using
the lift join and now we can see the
orders informations of each customer and
you can see immediately those two
customers didn't order anything because
we are seeing here nulls right so they
are empty there is no orders now we can
use this information in order to filter
the data I just want to see Martin and
Peter so what you can do we can go and
say where and all what you have to do is
to take the key that we are using in
order to join in the tables this is this
one over here and say this must be null
so is null so if you see it like this
that means you want to see the data if
the customer ID is null so let's go and
execute it perfect now you are getting
the customers who haven't order anything
and this is exactly the effect that we
wanted the left anti-join we are getting
the data from the left side where there
are no match on the right side so you
have always to do it in two steps first
join the data as you normally do using
the classical joins the lift join and
then the second step you go and use a
filter using the wear clause if you do
it like this you can check for not
existence and with that we are getting
the effect of the left anti-join so
that's it okay so now if you are looking
to this picture I think you already know
where we use the lift anti- join we're
going to use it only in the last use
case where we are checking the existence
so if you use the lift join together
with the where you can check for the
notexistence of your data in another
table so This is exactly for this
scenario. All right. So that's all about
the left anti- join. Now we're going to
speak about the exact opposite of that.
We will cover the right anti- join. So
it's going to be very similar but we are
just switching sides. So let's
go. Okay. So now what is exactly the
right anti- join? Well, it is the
opposite of the left anti- join. So we
want to return the rows from the right
table that has no match in the left
table. So again if you are looking to
our two circles. Now what is important
is the right table. We want to see only
the unmatching rows from the right
table. So only the rows that exist in B
but not in A. And from the left table we
don't need anything. So no data is
needed and that means the only source of
data comes from the right table and you
are using the left table as a filter as
a lookup just in order to check the
existence. So now the syntax of that
going to be very similar to the left
anti- join. So we don't have a special
type called right anti-join. We have to
use the classical one the right join.
But if you do that you will get
everything from the right table. And now
in order to get rid of the matching data
in the middle we use a filter. We use
the wear clause where we say we are
interested only on the unmatching data.
So we take the key from the left table
and we say the key from left is null.
And if you do that you will get rid of
any matching data. Is null means there
is no match. And again here the same
thing the order of the tables is very
important since here we are talking
about sides and you have to do it
correctly. Okay. So now the task says
get all orders without matching
customers. So now it is exactly the
opposite. We want to see all the orders
that don't have a valid customer. So
this is really bad scenario. You have in
your business orders without a valid
customers. So let's see how we can
discover that using SQL joins. Now as
you can see we are focusing completely
on the orders. It's not the customers
anymore. And we want to see only the
orders where there is no match with the
customers. So now again here we have two
steps. The first step we're going to go
and do the normal join. So using either
the left or the right join. Now by
looking to this query you can leave it
like this where you can start from the
customers. But if you want to fully
focus on the orders you have to switch
this from left to right. And with that
you will get all the orders and only the
matching customers. And let's go and
remove this workloads from here first.
So I'm just adding comments. And with
that SQL going to totally ignore this
line of code. So let's go and execute
it. Now you can see we are getting all
the orders right and data from customers
only if there is a match. And now of
course this is not the task. We don't
want to see all the orders. We want to
see only the orders where we don't have
a match from the customers. So if you
look to this those three orders they are
okay. They are totally fine. We are
finding customers for them. So they have
valid customers. But this order here is
really bad. So there is no valid
customer for this order and now our task
to show only this type of orders in the
result. Now what we have to do we have
to use the workclass in order to get
exactly the effects. So this time we're
going to say if the ID of the customer
here. So here we're going to say the ID
of the customer from the table customers
must be null. So we're going to remove
this here and take the key join from the
customer and we are saying this ID must
be null. So let's go and execute it.
Perfect. With us we have solved the task
and we are getting the effect of the
right anti- join and we are getting now
those orders that don't have any
customers. So we have solved the task.
Now my friends you have to go and solve
this task without using the right join
but still you have to get the same
effects. You want to get exactly those
orders without customers. So pause the
video and go solve the task.
[Music]
Now again as you know me I don't like
the right joins. We can create the same
effects if you switch the sides of the
table. So if you say the B table now on
the left side and the A on the right
side then we will get the same effect if
you go and switch the type of join from
right to left and you go just switch the
tables. So you start from the B table
since it's on the left side and then
join it with the A. And we still say of
course in our work condition where the
data from A is null. So there is no
match. So if you do this you will get
the exact same results like the lift
query by using the lift join and just
switching the tables. So you will get
the same results and with that you know
that in scale we have always
alternatives. I hope that you are done.
So it's very simple what you're going to
do. We're going to go and switch the
joins and since the orders is the main
table we're going to start first from
the table orders. So we are putting it
on the left side and then the right
table going to be the customers. And of
course the condition going to stay as it
is. We want to see the orders where
there is no customer. So we don't have
to switch anything here or in the join
key. So let's go and execute it. With
that you are getting the same exact
results. Since we are using here the
star, it's always starts from the left
table and show the data from the right
table. But still the result is valid. We
are getting this type of orders without
matching customers. And I prefer this
way. All right. So now with that we have
the left, the right and now of course
what is next? We will get the full. So
let's speak about now the full anti-join
in SQL. Let's
go. Okay. So now what is exactly a full
anti- join? Well, this time we don't
have sides. We want to return only the
rows that don't match in either tables.
So what this means? If you are looking
to the left circle, we want only the
unmatching rows. So we don't want the
whole circle. We want only the data that
exist in A but it don't exist in B on
the right table. Sounds like the left
ant join but since we are saying full
then you have to do the same thing on
the right side as well. So on the right
table we want only the unmatching rows.
So we want to see in the result the data
that is in B but don't have a match from
A. So it's exactly the opposite. And if
you look to this then that means we want
to see only the unmatching data and this
is exactly the opposite effect of the
inner join. In the inner join we were
interested only on the matching data
only when there is like overlapping. But
now with the full anti-join it is
exactly the opposite. We don't want to
see the matching data. We want to see
everything else the unmatching data. So
how we going to write this query? Again
here we don't have a special type called
full anti-join. We will use the help of
the classical full join. So the basic
one. So you start from a full join b and
then the same key. But now what is
interesting is about the where
condition. Now we have like two
conditions right? So now in order to get
all data from A that has no match in B,
you have to make a filter where you say
the key from the B table must be null.
And now since we want the exact same
thing from the right table, we want all
the data in B that has no match in A.
You have to say as well the key from the
A table must be null. So now we have
here like two conditions. And in SQL if
you have like two conditions in the work
clause, you have here two options either
use and operator or the over operator.
So now the one that we're going to use
here is the or operator. So either the
key from right is empty or the key from
left is empty. If you do it like this,
you will get the effect of the full
anti- join. And of course since here
both sides are equal then the order of
the tables as well here is not that
important. So you can say from A full
join B or from B full join A. It doesn't
matter. So now let's go back to scale in
order to create this effect. Okay.
Instead we have the following task and
it says find customers without orders
and orders without customers. So if you
are looking to this this means we want
to see only the unmatching data from
customers and as well from orders. There
is no main table and secondary table.
Both of them are equally important. So
now since we are talking about the
unmatching data and the anti-join we
have to do it in two steps. The first
step we're going to do the classical
join and then we focus on the wear
clause. So let me remove the wear clause
to make it as a comment. Now since we
want the data from left and right, we're
going to go and use the full join. So
let's go and execute it. Now you can see
we are getting the effect of the full
join. We are getting all the orders and
as well all the customers. But now we
are interested only on the strange cases
where they are like orders without
customers like this one here and as well
customers without orders. So that means
the first three rows they are not really
interesting for us because it is boring.
We have here matching data and this is
totally fine but we are not focusing on
that now. We are focusing only if there
is like missing data from left or from
right. As you notice I'm saying or and
this is very important because we're
going to use the or operator. So now
let's focus on getting this scenario
over here. We want to get an order
without a customer. So that means the
customer ID must be null. And we have it
already here. So we are saying where the
ID of the customer is null. So if I go
and execute it, I will get only one
records only this one over here. But as
well I want to get the opposite
scenario. So in this scenario, the
customer ID must be null. So we're going
to say or the customer
ID in the orders is null or we can do it
like side by side like this. Either the
right side is null or the left side is
null. So if you go and execute it, you
will get the effect of the full
anti-join. And with that we are finding
the customers without orders and orders
without customers. I think this is
really fun and as well really easy. So
this is how we do the full anti- join.
All right. So now if you are looking to
the use cases we use the full anti- join
again exactly for the last use case in
order to check the existence. So if you
combine the full with the where you can
check the existence or the notexistence
of your data in another table. So this
is exactly the scenario for that.
Okay, my friends, now we have a bonus
section where I'm going to challenge you
to solve the following task without
using an inner join. So, it says, "Get
all customers along with their orders,
but only for customers who have placed
an order, but without using an inner
join." So, pause the video now and go
and solve this
[Music]
task. Okay, so now let's see how we're
going to solve this. We want the
customers, the orders, blah blah blah.
But we want only the customers who have
placed an order. Previously, we have
used the inner join in order to solve
this task. But this time, we are not
allowed to use it. So, let's go and
solve it. This is how I'm going to do
it. Select star from table customers.
Can't give it the alias. So, now I'm
getting all the customers, but I am
interested only the customers who have
placed an order. So, as we know before
there's like two customers didn't order
anything, and we don't want to see them
in the final results. Now how we will
get that? Well, we can use the help of
the table orders in order to check the
existence of our customers there. And of
course, I'm not allowed to use the inner
join. So I'm going to go and use a left
join with a table orders and then
combine them as usual. Nothing new with
the customer ID. So now let's go and
execute it. As you can see, we are doing
it step by step. You don't have to rush
everything in one go. So you start
simple, check the results and decide on
the next step. So now by looking at
these results I want to get those three
customers because they have ordered
something and we are seeing data about
their orders and I don't want to get in
the result the last two. So again we
still can use the customer ID from the
right table in order to decide which
data going to stay in the result and
which data should be filtered. We're
going to go and use the wear clause and
then the key from the orders and this
time we're going to say is not null. I
know we didn't learn yet about the not
and the logical operators but using the
not null it means there should be data
inside the column it must not be null if
you do it like this and execute you will
get the exact effect as the inner join.
So as you can see as you are joining the
tables using the left join you can
control what you want to see using the
wear clouds using the filter and this is
how you can solve this task without
using an inner join. Okay, so with that
we have covered all those three
scenarios in order to find the
unmatching data. Left, right, full and
joints. Now we can speak about one crazy
join. We call it the cross join. This
one is totally different from all other
types that we have learned. So let's
understand exactly what is the cross
join. Let's
go. So now what is exactly a cross join?
Now in some scenarios we want to combine
every row from the left, every row from
the right. So that means I want to see
all the possible combinations from both
tables. So we are doing something called
like cartesian join. So now if you look
at our two circles, we want everything
from A and as well everything from B. So
that means I want to see everything from
A combined with everything with B. So in
this example, we have two rows in A and
three rows in B. If you do a cross join,
you will get six possible combinations
by just multiplying the number of rows
between A and B. So be careful using the
cross join. If you use it, you will get
like crazy number of rows in the results
and you're going to make the database
really busy finding out the result for
you. So now about the syntax, it's going
to be the easiest. So you start as usual
from one of those tables, the A for
example, and then you say cross join B.
So now my friends, if you look at this,
you can see it's not like the previous
joins that we have done. We have always
before talked about unmatching rows,
matching rows and so on. But here we
don't care at all about whether the data
is matching or not. I just want to see
all the possible combinations
everything. So since we don't care about
matching the two tables, we don't have
to specify any condition. So there is no
need to use the keyword on because we
don't need any condition. So that's it.
You just say cross join B and the magic
can happen. So this is a cross join.
Let's go to SQL to try that. Okay. So
now we have the following task. It says
generate all possible combinations of
customers and orders. So that means we
want everything with everything using
the cross join and this going to be very
simple. So we're going to start with
select star from whatever table. So you
can start from the customers and then
you say cross join orders. That's it.
Very simple. Let's go and execute it. So
now as you know we have five customers
and four orders. And if you multiply
them you will get in the results 20
rows. So now we are getting everything
with everything. even if the data is not
matching at all. So you can see for
example the orders here. So this is one
order that belongs only to one customer
the customer ID one. So it is an order
from actually Maria but still we are
seeing this same order with the other
customers since we want to combine
everything with everything. So there are
no rules. The same thing for the next
set. So this is the second order
actually belongs to John but we are
seeing this order with all customers. So
that's it. This is how the cross join
works. And now you might ask me why we
have this. It makes no sense, right?
Well, my friends, I rarely use it. But
sometimes if I want to generate like
test data or maybe if you have like for
example table called colors and table
called products and you would like to
see all the combinations between the
products and the colors. So in some
scenarios it makes really sense to see
all your products together with all the
colors without any matching conditions
or whatever. So there are like few
scenarios for the cross join if you are
like doing simulations or testing. So
this is how we do the cross join. Okay.
So that's all about the cross join. And
with that we have covered the four
advanced types of joins. Now if you look
at this you might ask okay how I'm going
to choose between all those types. So
you might ask me okay bar how you do it?
Well I'm going to show you now my
decision tree that I usually follow in
order to choose the correct type.
So now if I'm combining two tables and I
want to see in the results only the
matching data between two tables then I
go and use the inner join. We don't have
any other type for that. So that's
simple but now if I want to see
everything all the data I don't want to
miss anything after joining two tables
then I take different path and here I
ask myself is there like one side more
important than the other am I interested
in all data from one table from one side
like here we have like a main table or a
master table then I go and use the lift
join but if I want to see all the data
from all tables in my query everything
so there is no one table more important
than other then I go with the full join
So this is another path and now the
third path if I'm interested to see only
the unmatching data. So I'm doing some
kind of checkups and so on. And here
again the same thing do I want to see
the unmatching data from only one side.
There is like one table that is
important then I go and use the lift
anti- join. So I want to see the
unmatching data from one table and I'm
using the other table only for the
check. But in my query if both of the
tables are important there is no main
table and secondary table both are
important then I go and use the full
anti- join. So actually that's it. This
is the decision tree that I follow
usually as I'm writing a query. And you
might ask me how about the right join.
Well as you know me I don't have it at
all in my decision tree. So I don't use
it at all. Now by looking to this I can
tell you if I check most of the queries
that I write very often I use the left
join. So I can tell you this is my
favorite way on how to join tables. So
let me show you exactly
why. Usually I write queries in order to
do data analyzes. So in data analytics
you have always like starting points.
You have like a topic that you are
analyzing like the customer. So you have
always like a master table. So I always
start with the main table of my
analysis. So in my query I start from
this table from table A the main table.
And then what happens? The data is not
enough in this table. I need some extra
data that comes from another table like
the table B. So the table B is only here
like an additional data to the master
table. So I go and use the lift join in
order to connect the table B and then I
find another interesting information in
another table in table C. So same things
happens. I go and join the tables using
the lift join and so on. So I keep
connecting multiple tables to this main
table in the middle. And my query going
to look like this. always doing lift
joins with multiple tables. Now, of
course, you might say, "Yeah, but
sometimes you would like to see only the
matching data and so on. So, it makes
sense only to use the inner join." Well,
in order to do that, I can control
everything that I want to see in the
final results using the wear clause. So,
in the wear clause, I define exactly
what I want to see in the final result.
So, with that, I get like more
flexibility on whether I want to see the
matching, unmatching data and so on like
we done in the lift and join, right? So
as I'm analyzing data I tend very
frequently having this setup where I
start from the main table and I lift
join all other tables and with the word
conditions I control the final results.
So this is how I connect multiple tables
together. So now if I want to visual
this in like circles it's going to look
like this. We have the circle A. So this
is the master table the starting point.
I want to see all the data from table A
and I live join it then with another
table B and from table B I want to see
only the matching data. So it's like the
lift join. Now what going to happen? I'm
going to go and add another table. So
another circle the circle C. And from
the circle C, we want to see only the
matching data. And of course you can
keep adding circles to this. But it's
going to be always the same thing. And
in your circle going to has only the
matching data. So now as we learned we
can use joins in order to combine
multiple tables to get a complete big
picture about topic like the customers.
I would like to see everything about the
customers in the final results. So
either you're going to do it like me
where you start from the main table and
then go and lift join all other tables
or maybe you say you know what there is
no main table about the customer's data
all the tables are equally important
then you can go and join all those
tables using the inner join if you are
interested only on the match data so
what can happen if you have again those
circles from the A you need only the
matching data from B you need as well
only matching data and as well from the
third circle so you are interested only
on the overlapping between all all three
tables. So you will get only this
section where you have overlapping
between all three tables. So this is of
course another way on how to join
multiple tables. Okay. So now my friends
let's go back to scale in order to
practice how to join multiple tables.
Okay. So now let's have a task. This
going to be a little bit challenging. We
will be doing multi- joins using the
sales DB. Retrieve a list of all orders
along with the related customer product
and employee details. And for each order
display the following. We want to see
the order ID, the customer name, the
product name, sales price, salesperson
name. So there is a lot of things that
is going on. And the first thing that
you're going to notice it does now we
are using different database. We will be
not using the my database, we're going
to go and use the sales DB. So this is
the first thing that we have to do. So
instead of using my database, so we say
use sales DB and then execute it. We are
now connected to the sales DB. So this
is the first thing. So now if you are
reading this task there are a lot of
tables that are involved. We need the
orders, we need the customers, products
and employees. So there are like four
tables needed in this task and we need
different stuff from each table. So now
how I think about it well it is mainly
focusing on the table orders right? So
we need all the orders we cannot miss
any order here. So this sounds for me
this is the main table and then it says
along with that we need other
informations. So that means the other
tables are not that important like the
orders. So this gives me feeling about
what is the main table and this going to
be my starting points. So let's start
from that from the table orders. So
select star from and here you have to
pay attention that this database has
always a schema. It's called if you look
to the left side sales dot the table
name. So we have to write that now in
our query. So we're going to write it
over here sales dot and then the table
name orders. Let's go and execute it.
Now I know this is the first time that
you are querying this table. We have a
lot of informations here and as well we
have a lot of ids. Those ids going to
help us of course on joining our data
with the other tables. So what do we
need from here? We need the order ID. So
we have it over here. We're going to get
the order ID. This time the naming
convention is different. We don't have
like underscores and comm. We have
different type of namings. So be careful
with that. So what else do we need? We
need the sales. So if you go to the
right side over here, we have column
gold sales and we're going to go and
include it to the results. Now all the
other informations are actually not
needed, but I need those ids in order to
join it with the other tables. So now
what I'm going to do, I'm going to go
and give it an alias and all. So now I'm
going to go and assign it for each
column. This comes from the orders and
as well the same thing for the sales. So
that's it for now. And if I go and
execute it, I will get the orders and
the sales. All right, so that's all for
the first table. Let's go now and see
what do we need. We need the customer's
name. Well, actually we don't have this
piece of information in the orders. So
all what you have to do is to go and
explore in the other tables in order to
find this column. So how I usually do I
go and explore the tables like this. So
I write a symbol select from each
tables. So the customers. So now I go
and repeat this for each table inside
the database. So we have the customers,
employees, we have an orders, the orders
archive and as well the products. So now
I start exploring the table. So if I go
to the customers over here, we can see
we have here five customers and we can
see the names of the customers. So we
see the first name and the last name and
this is exactly what I need for my
query. Now of course we have to go and
connect this table with the orders. So
we need a common column. Usually it's
going to be the ID. So here we have the
customer ID and if you go and query the
orders you can find here as well the
customer ID. Now if you are working in
big projects you're going to have a lot
of tables and exploring each one of them
going to be really hard. So now of
course if you have like in the project
hundreds of tables it's going to be
really hard to explore each table. So
instead of that a good project a good
database usually has an entity
relationship model er model like the one
that we have for the course. And here
you can find easily the tables that you
have inside your database and as well
the relationship between them and this
is very important especially if you want
to join tables. So now by just looking
quickly to this diagram I can understand
okay there is an ID called customer ID
inside the table orders and it is like a
foreign key to the primary key the
customer ID. So that means if I want to
connect the orders with the customers I
have to use that customer ID. So as you
can see this is really nice
documentations and I can quickly
understand how to join the tables. So
now back to our query. Now what I'm
going to do I'm going to say lift join.
So with that I guarantee all the orders
going to be presented in the output and
I will see always 10 orders. So now
let's join it with the table customers
sales dot customers and let's give it an
alias like this. And now we're going to
build the joining condition. So it's
going to be the customer ID from the
table orders equal to the customer ID
from the table customers. So that SQL
understand how to match the two tables.
And now the two tables are connected and
I can get the informations now from the
customers. So see let's go and get the
first name and as well the last
name. So now let's go and execute it. So
now as you can see we have customers for
each order which is really nice. So with
that we got the customer name and the
order ID. Now the next one we need the
product name. So either you're going to
go here and start exploring. I think it
is inside the table products. And here
you can see we have the product. This is
the name of the products. And if you
check our ER diagram, you can see we can
connect the table orders with the
products using the product ID. So we
have the product ID in the left and as
well in the right. And now we can go and
build this join as well over here. So
again I go with a lift join. I don't
want to lose anything from the table
orders sales products and we give it an
alias P. Now the condition for that here
you have to be very focused. You want to
get the product from the orders. So you
say O dot product id equal to the
product ID from the table products. So
as you can see in the joins we are
always joining with the table orders.
Right? We are not trying to join for
example the customers with the products.
Always we are joining with the main
table. So with that we have connected
the third table and we can get the
information that we need. So we need the
products as I'm going to go and rename
it products name. So let's go and
execute it. And with that my friends I'm
getting now the product informations
from the table products. So we have the
sales as well and we need the price. So
if you go to the products you can see we
have as well price information. I forgot
about it. So let's go and get it as well
from the same table. price. So let's go
and execute it. And with that we have as
well the prices. Now the last column it
says we want to get the saleserson name.
So the name of the employee right now if
you go and explore as well we have here
employees table and execute it. You can
see we have here the name and the last
name of the employees and we have an ID.
So now we need this ID as well in the
orders. So you can see we have the
product ID, the customer ID. We already
used those two. But we have here one
more extra ID called the salesperson ID.
Of course, it is not called employee ID.
So here you might be a little bit
skeptical about it. That's why we have
to go and check again our ER diagram.
And as you can see the employee ID from
the employees, it is connected to the
salesperson ID. So that I have better
feeling about it and I understand. Okay,
I can connect the orders with the
employees using the salesperson ID. So
let's go and do that. I'm going to say
lift join. So as you can see I'm just
doing left joins sales dot employees as
e and the condition again very important
always the first table is included in
the join condition and here we're going
to say the sales person ID is equal to
the employee ID. So with that we have
connected as well the employees and we
will get as well the first name and the
last name. So perfect that's it. Let's
go and execute it. And as you can see
guys, now we are getting the name of the
salesperson. Now here comes an issue. As
you are joining multiple tables and you
are getting columns from different
tables, what can happen? You might
encounter this scenario where you have
the same names in multiple tables. So
now as you can see we have the first
name last name from the employees and as
well we have the first name last name
from the customers and it's going to be
really hard from the result to
understand what are we talking about? Is
it the customers? Is it the employee?
That's why in this scenario if you have
the same names we have to go and start
giving aliases. So for the first one
we're going to say customer first name
and as well for the last name we're
going to say customer last name. Same
thing for the employee. So let's say
employee first name or we can call it
the saleserson whatever employee last
name. So if you go and execute it now
it's going to be more clear. Here we are
talking about the name of the customer
and here we are talking about the name
of the employee. And again one more
thing if you are not using aliases it's
going to be an issue. So for example if
you go over here and you don't use the
table name before the column. So if I go
and remove it and execute it you will
see I'm getting an error. Now SQL can't
understand what are you talking about.
Is it the first name of the customer or
from the employees because you are not
specific about it. So you have to tell
SQL to which table belong this column.
It's very important to use a table name
or the alias before the column name.
Especially if you have the same column.
So now we will not get an error. And
with that we have solved the task. You
have really to pay attention about the
join keys. The condition you have to do
it correctly cuz as you can see now we
have a lot of tables and a lot of
columns and sometimes happens an issue
where you specify the wrong columns or
the joins and the result can makes at
all no sense. So always double check are
you using the correct keys in order to
join the tables. So with that you have
solved the task and this is exactly how
I join tables. I have always a starting
point from an important table and
everything else going to be left joined
and in my results if I want to remove
any scenario then I go and use the wear
clause. So this is how I join multiple
tables. Okay my friends. So with that
you have learned now everything about
how to join the tables in SQL and this
is very important to understand. Now
moving on to the second method on how to
combine your data from multiple tables.
We have the set operators. So we're
going to go and cover how to combine the
rows from multiple tables. So let's
go. All right, my friends. So now as we
learned before, in order to combine two
tables we have two methods. If you want
to combine the columns, we use the
joins. And we have learned all those
different types on how to combine data
using join. So we have covered this
section. But now if we want to combine
the rows of two tables, we can use the
set operators. And here we have four
different types. We have union, union
all, except and intersects. So now we're
going to go and deep dive into this word
on how to combine the rows of tables
using the set operators. And now of
course in this course we're going to
cover everything. So let's
go. All right. So now let's have a look
to the syntax of the set operators.
Okay. So now let's see that we have the
following query. we are selecting the
data from the customers. So this is our
first query or our first select
statements and we have another one which
is very similar where we are selecting
the informations from the employees and
this is our second select statement. So
now what we can do we can put between
those two queries a set operators like
for example the union. We can use of
course any other set operators like the
union all intersects except and so on.
So as you can see the syntax is very
simple. We have two different queries
and we just put between them the set
operator. So this is how the syntax of
the set operators looks like. All right
friends. So now we're going to talk
about the rules of the set operators.
And we're going to start with the rule
number one the SQL clauses. In each
individual select statements or query.
We can use almost all the SQL clauses
like where join group by having. But
there is only one exception with the
order by. Order by you can use it only
once and only at the end of the entire
query. So that means we cannot use order
by in each select statements or in each
query. We can use it only once and only
at the ends of the entire query. All
right. So about the syntax again here we
have our two select statements and in
between them we have the set operators.
So now in each query we can go and use
multiple stuff like the join where group
by having. So we can make each query
complex as we want. So everything is
allowed but not the order by the order
by must be always placed at the end of
the entire query. So if you want to sort
the result by the first name, you have
to use the order by exactly at the end.
So we are not allowed to use order by in
each query. Okay. Moving on to the rule
number two. The number of columns. The
number of columns in each query must be
the same. Okay. Okay. So now in order to
understand this rule, let's have this
very simple example. We're going to go
and select the first name and the last
name from the table sales customers. So
this is our first query, our first
select statements and let's say that I
have another one and we want to select
the first name last name but this time
from another table, the employees. So
with that we have our two queries and I
would like now to go and combine them
into one result. So we're going to go
and use the set operator union. Let's go
and execute it. So now as you can see in
the result we will get the first name
and last name from two tables the
customers and employees. And it is
working because we are fulfilling the
rule where it says the number of columns
must be the same in both queries. So how
many columns do we have in the first
query? We have two right and as well in
the second query we have two columns. So
that's why everything is working. So now
let's go and break the rule by adding
another column to the first query. So
let's say that I would like to have the
customer ID as well in the first query
and with that as you can see in the
first query we have three columns but in
the second we have only two. So let's go
and execute it. Now as you can see in
the result we will get an error where it
says if you are using union intersect
and all those set operators you must
have an equal number of columns between
queries. So this is the rule you have to
have the same number of columns in order
to repair it. So I'm going to do I'm
just going to remove the customer ID.
Okay. So here again we have two columns
and the second one as well two columns
and everything going to be working.
Okay. Moving on to the rule number
three. The data types of columns in each
query must match must be compatible in
matching. In order to check that what
we're going to do we're going to go to
the object explorer to the left side.
Let's go and browse the customers and
the columns. And as you can see we have
here the first name and last name with
the same data type. We have the vchar.
And if you go to the employees, you can
see as well the first name, last name
having varchar. So the first column is
varchchar from the first query and as
well for the employees and as well the
last name from the customers having the
same data type as the last name from
employees. So the data type is matching.
Now let's go and break this rule.
Instead of having the first name, I
would like to go and use the customer
ID. So now let's check the customer ID
on the left side. It is an int, an
integer. But the first name is
invarchar. So here we have a mismatch
between data types. Let's go and try to
execute it. So now we are getting an
error where it says SQL is trying to
convert the value Frank to an integer.
So what this means the first query is
always controlling everything the names
and as well the data types. So here we
have an integer and now scale is trying
as well to convert the first name values
to an integer and of course it will not
work because we have here characters
inside and it cannot convert characters
to an integer. So we have a mismatch
between data types between the customer
ID and the first name and that's why we
will get an error. The second column we
don't have an issue because it is
varchar in the first table and as well
for the second table. So now in order to
repair it either select a first name in
the first query or we can go over here
and say employee ID and with that if I
execute it we will not get any errors
because the employee ID is as well an
integer and we have a match in the data
types. So as you can see it's not enough
to have the same number of columns. You
have to have as well matching data types
between those two queries. Okay, let's
move to the next rule. Rule number four,
the order of columns. The order of
columns in each query must be as well
the same. Okay, so let's understand what
this means. Now we have here again the
same example where we are selecting the
ID and last name from customers and we
are combining it using union with the
employee ID and last name from the
employees. And as you can see everything
is working because we have the same
number of columns and we have a matching
data types. So now let's go and break
it. What I'm going to do I'm just going
to switch between those two columns. So
first I'm selecting the last name and
then the customer ID. So again I have
the same number of columns and the ID is
integer matching the ID of the employee
and the last name having the same data
type. So let's go and execute it. So
here again SQL going to throw an error
and says SQL is trying to convert the
value go back to an integer. So it's
like character to integer. It will not
work. So what happened here? I have here
the same informations. I have an ID and
last name and ID and last name. Well,
SQL doesn't work like this. SQL going to
go and map the first column from the
first query with the first column with
the second query. So it's going to go
and map last name to employee ID. And
since they have different data types,
SQL going to throw an error. So SQL
doesn't understand or don't know how to
map let's say the ID with the ID and
since they have different data types SQL
going to go and throw an error. So as
you can see here we have the same
informations between customers and
employees but they don't have the same
order. So SQL cannot go and map the
informations because of the names of the
columns. It's going to go and simply
just mapping the columns like this. The
first column from the first query with
the first column from the second query.
So as you can see in this rule you must
have the same order of the columns.
First the ID and then the last name and
with that it's going to work again. All
right moving on to the rule number five.
The column aliases column names that we
see in the output in the result is
defined and determined by the column
names of the first query the first
select statements. So that means the
first query is responsible of naming the
columns in the output. Okay. So let's
understand what this rule means. Again
we have the same example. The customer
ID, last name from customers, union,
employee ID, last name from employees.
So if you check closely the output, you
can see that in the output we have the
customer ID and not the employee ID.
Even though we have the ids from the
employee ID, but as you can see the
first query is controlling the naming of
the output. So since the first column
called the customer ID, you will see it
in the output as a customer ID. So the
naming of the like the next queries will
be totally ignored. So that's why if you
want to give aliases to the output,
you're going to go and do it only for
the first query. So for example, I go
over here and say instead of having
customer ID, I would like to call it as
an ID. So now if I go and execute it, as
you can see in the output, we will get
an ID. So I don't have to go and in each
query give this alias. So I don't have
to go over here and say yeah you are as
well the ID because it's enough to
define it from the first query. So
there's no need to give the same names
in the next queries. Let's take another
example where we would like to have an
alias for the last name. So I would like
to have it like this last name and let's
go and do it in the second query. So
last name let's go and execute it. So
now as you can see in the output, we
still have last name and there's no
underscore because this is totally
ignored from SQL. This is not the first
query. The first query says you are last
name without underscore. So again if you
want to do that we go over here. Let me
just get it and put it in the first
query. Let's go and execute it. So my
friends, the first query is very
important in order to give the names for
the output. So if you want to do aliases
and to rename stuff, do it only on the
first query. And as well the first query
controls the data types. All right. Now
to the last rule matching the correct
informations. If in your query you
fulfill all other rules and you don't
have an error in the SQL that doesn't
mean that your result is accurate and
correct. You are the only one that is
responsible of mapping the informations
between queries correctly because SQL
doesn't understand the content and the
informations of your tables of your
queries. And if you don't match the
informations correctly between the
queries, you will get inaccurate and
wrong results in the output. Okay. So
now back to our example. Let's say I
would like to get the first name and as
well the last name from the customers
and the same informations from the
employees. Let's go and execute it. Now
as you can see it's very nice where we
are getting the first name, last name
from both tables in one result and we
are fulfilling all the requirements in
SQL. Same numbers, same data types and
so on. Now let's go and make incorrect
results. So what I'm going to do, I'm
just going to swap the first name and
last name in the second query. So first
last name and then the first name. So
let's go and execute it. So now as you
can see we will get results because we
are fulfilling all other rules because
we have the same number of columns and
as well we have matching data types. So
the first one is character the first
name and the last name is as well
character. So SQL will just present the
result as you define it. But the result
is completely wrong because now we have
if you check the first column here the
first name. So here we can see last
names inside the first names. For
example, Brown and Baker those are last
names but we can see them inside the
first name. And the same thing in the
last name. We now we can see first names
inside it. Mary, Carol, they are all
first names. So as you can see the
result has really bad data quality. We
are now mixing stuff and it doesn't
makes any sense. But SQL will not know
that because SQL doesn't know the
information the content of your data.
It's just mapping the data types. So
first name is varchchar the last name as
well vchar. Everything is fine and you
will get the results. So my friends you
are responsible of having the same
informations mapped between the two
queries and not having an error from a
skill doesn't mean that we have now
correct results. So pay attention to the
informations that you are mapping
between the two queries. All right. So
those are the rules of the set
operators. So the first one is that the
order by can only be used once at the
end of the entire query and all queries
must have the same number of columns,
the matching data types, the same order
of columns and the first query always
control the names and the aliases of the
result set and as well the data type.
And the last rule is that make sure that
you are mapping the correct informations
to each others between queries. So those
are the rules of the set
operators. Okay. So what is union? Union
going to go and return all distinct
unique rows from both queries. So that
means it's going to go and combine
everything and all the rows going to be
presented at the output. So since it
says all distinct unique rows that means
union going to go and remove all
duplicates from the combined result set.
So union going to make sure that each
row going to appear only once. All
right. So now let's have this very
simple example. We have two sets of
data. We have the customers where we
have five customers with the first names
and as well we have another set called
employees and we have as well the first
names of the employees and we have five
employees. And now if you take a look to
the first names you can see that we have
the same persons as a customers and as
well as employees. We have given and
marry in both sets of data. So now how
is k going to execute union it's going
to go and return everyone from customers
and everyone from the employees. But now
since we have given and married twice in
the output we're going to have them only
once. So this is how the union works. It
going to go and return everyone from two
sets but without duplicates. All right.
So now we have the following task and it
says combine the data from employees and
customers into one table. So that means
in one table we want to combine all
informations from employees and
customers. So which informations do we
need? This is the first question that I
usually ask myself. So in order to do
that first we have to explore the data.
So select star from sales customers and
then semicolon. Then I'm going to write
another query select star from sales and
employees and semicolon. So now why I'm
using two different semicolons because
I'm telling SQL we have now two separate
queries. They have nothing to do with
each others. And if you go and execute
it like this. And now in the output you
can see we got two result grids. The
first result grid is for the first query
and the second one for the second query.
So they have nothing to do with each
others. I just want to explore those two
tables in order to understand how I'm
going to map those informations. So now
if we check those two tables you can see
that both of them has ids. So we can map
those informations right. Both of them
has as well first name last name. So
that means I can go and map the first
name and last name together. Now in the
customers we have country but we don't
have this informations in the employee.
So we have to go and ignore it. And we
have as well here score where we don't
have a score for the employees. That
means I can go and map three
informations between the customers and
employees. Now of course we can go and
think do we need really the ids because
it doesn't make really any sense to have
the ids in the tables. It's not anymore
unique because we have here the custom
ID one and employee one. So I think we
can go and ignore it. So the only really
two informations that is useful to map
is the first name and last name. So now
let's go and add those two informations.
So we need the first name, last name and
the same informations as well from the
employees. But now we want everything to
be in one query. That's why I'm going to
go and remove the semicolons. And now we
have to go and use set operators between
those two queries. And now in order to
combine the data we have two options
either union or union all in this
example it doesn't mention anything
about duplicates and so on. I would like
to go with the union in order to remove
the duplicates if there is any. So
that's it. Let's go and execute it. Now
as you can see in the output we have
only one result because we have only one
big query. And now we have the first
names and last names from the customers
and employees. And now one more thing
about the order of the queries. It
doesn't matter whether we start with the
employees or with the customers. we will
get the exact same results but pay
attention to the naming of the columns.
Always the first query controls the
names but since now they have the same
naming so it should not be a problem. So
if I go and switch those two tables and
start it again we will get exact same
results. So now let's understand how
scale did combine the data using the
union. Okay. So now we have here the
results from the first query and the
second query employees and customers and
we are combining the data using union.
The first step in SQL is that it's going
to go and take the columns from the
first query which is from the employees.
So it's going to take the first name
last name as a column name to the
results. And now the next that is going
to go and start combining the rows
between those two tables. So first going
to go and take the rows from employees
and as well going to check whether there
is duplicates in the data. So as you can
see we don't have here any duplicates.
So we're going to have the five
employees. And now the next step is
going to start adding rows from the
second query from the customers very
carefully without generating any
duplicates. We don't have it in the
output. That's why it's still going to
go and add it to the result. Append it.
And then the next customer we have Kevin
Brown. As you can see, we have it
already in the results. That's why will
not go and add it to the result.
Otherwise, it's going to go and generate
duplicates. So it's still going to
ignore this customer. The same thing for
Mary. We have Mary as well in the
results. So it's going to skip it. And
then we're going to go to the mark. As
you can see, we don't have mark in the
results. That's why SQL going to go and
take this customer and put it in the
output. And then the last one, we have
Anna. We don't have Anna in the results.
That's why SQL can go and as well add it
to the results. And now with this, SQL
did combine the rows between those two
tables. And we have here eight persons.
So as you can see, SQL is combining the
data, but very carefully not generating
any duplicates. All right. So that's it.
This is how the union operator works.
Okay. So now union all union union all
going to go and return all rows from
both queries. So it's very similar to
union. It going to go and combine all
the rows and everything going to be
presented in the combined result set.
But the big difference to the union all
will not remove any duplicates. It is
the only set operators that doesn't
remove duplicates and it going to show
all the rows as it is. So if you have a
row 10 times from the query, you will
find it as well in the output 10 times.
Now you might ask me when to use union
and when to use union all. I'm going to
say that there is one big difference
between them is that union all has way
better performance and it's faster than
the union. And that's because union all
doesn't perform additional steps like
removing duplicates. So my friends that
means if you know already that in my
queries there is no duplicates. I know
my tables. I know my queries. There's no
duplicates. Don't use union and always
use union all because you will get
better performance. Another scenario for
the union all is that I would like to
see the duplicate. I'm doing data
quality checks and I would like to see
whether there is duplicate after I
combine multiple queries. So in this
situation I go and use as well the union
all. Now we have again the same example.
We have the customers and employees and
we have as well the same persons Kevin
and Mary as customers and as well as
employees. So now if you want to combine
the data using union all it going to
return all rows including duplicates. So
that means SQL going to go and execute
union all like this it going to return
everything from customers and everything
from employees and Kevin and Mary going
to be presented twice in the output. So
as you can see union all is returning
all the rows as it is from the two
result sets and if there's duplicates in
the sets we will get as well duplicate
in the output. So Kevin going to be
existing twice in the output and marry
as well twice. So this is how the union
all works. All right. So now we have
very similar SQL task and it says
combine the data from employees and
customers into one table including
duplicates. So it's exactly like the
last task but this time in the task we
are saying include duplicates. So we
cannot go and use union. We have now to
go and use union all. We will have the
exact same query. So we are selecting
the employees first last name and as
well customers first last name. And now
instead of using union, we're going to
go and use union all. So all what we
have to do is that to go over here and
say union all. So now pay attention to
this. As you can see in the union
previously, we got eight records or
eight persons from the output. So now
let's go and execute it and check the
results. Now as you can see we got now
10 persons instead of eight. And that's
because we have five customers and five
employees and we have duplicates inside
the data. We have two duplicates. Now if
you check we have here Mary and as well
over here we have Mary and same goes for
given we have given over here and as
well here. So we have duplicates inside
the data and SQL just combine the two
tables. Okay. So now we're going to
understand how SQL execute union all in
order to combine data. All right. Again
we have the two results from queries. We
have the employees and customers and SQL
going to do the same steps. First going
to go and get the column names from the
first query and put it in the output.
It's still going to go and take all the
employees and put it in the output
without checking anything. So that means
if there is duplicates in the data, it's
going to be presented as well in the
output. It's very simple. Now it's going
to go to the second step and as well
take all the customers and append it
into the output like this. So that's it.
It's very fast. It's going to go and
just combine all the rows from the
employees and all the rows from the
customers. And with that, we're going to
get that 10 persons. And as you can see,
we have duplicates in the data. So we
have marry twice and given as well
twice. And that's why union all is the
fastest. It doesn't have any extra steps
or checks. Just taking all rows from all
queries and put it in the output. All
right. So as you can see it's very
simple, right? So that's all for the
union
all. Okay. So what is except sometime we
call it minus in other databases but in
SQL server we call it except. So it's
going to go and return a distinct rows
from the first query that are not found
in the second query. So from this
definition we can understand that the
order of the queries can affect the
final result. There is a first query and
a second query. So it is the only set
operator where you have to pay attention
to the order of the queries. And as well
it's like the others. It's going to go I
remove the duplicates from the result
set. All right. Again we have this very
simple example. We have two sets, five
customers, five employees and there is
the same persons as a customer and as
employees Kevin and Mary. So now we're
going to go and combine those two sets
using the excepts or sometime we call it
minus. So it says it's going to return
unique rows in the first table that are
not in the second table. So what going
to happen? What is the first table?
Let's say the customers on the left
side. So here we have five persons.
Joseph, Mark, Anna, Kevin and Mary. So
now the rule is we need the customers
that are not employees. So it's safe for
Joseph, Mark and Anna because they are
not existing in the second set. That's
why SQL going to return those three
values. But now for the two customers
given and marry here there is an issue.
Given and marry they are members of the
second set. The second table the
employees. That's why SQL going to go
and exclude them from the output because
they are not fulfilling the rule. So in
the output we will get only three
customers and all the values from
employees and the common values between
customers and employees will be excluded
from the output. So this is how the
except works. All right. So let's have a
very simple skill task and it says find
the employees who are not customers at
the same time. Okay. So let's see how
we're going to solve that. We're going
to stay with the same queries as usual.
We have the employees and the customers
but instead of having union all we're
going to use the set operator except. So
now since we are using except we have to
make sure that the order of the queries
are correct. So the first query is the
employees which is correct because we
have to find the employees who are not
customers at the same time. So we are
focusing on the employees. The first
table is correct and the second table is
customers. If the task says find the
customers who are not employees at the
same time then we have to go and switch
it. We have first to query the
customers. So now everything is correct.
Let's go and execute it. And now in the
output we see three employees who are
not customers at the same time. So we
have Carol, Frank and Michael. But as we
know we have five employees Kevin and
Mary. They are not here in the result
because they are customers as well. So
now let me show you what can happen if I
just switch those informations. So we
start with customers and then with
employees. Let's go and execute it. As
you can see, we're going to get
completely different results. Now we are
getting customers informations. And now
in the output, we got three customers
who are not employees at the same time.
This is not what we want from this task.
So if you do it like this, it's going to
be incorrect. So pay always attention
here to the order of that query. So now
let's go and correct it. So we're going
to have first employees and then
customers. Let's execute it. And now
let's go and understand how SQL execute
the except operator. All right. So again
we have the results from the two queries
or from two tables and now we are doing
except between them. So let's see how is
going to execute it. It's going to take
as usual first the names from the first
query from the employees and put it in
the output. And now SQL going to present
data only from the first query in the
output. And it going to go and use the
customers only as a check. So SQL will
not put any data or rows from the
customers. It will just use the second
query as a lookup in order to check the
data. So, it's going to start with the
first employee, Frankly. Do we have
Frankly in the customers? Well, no, we
don't have it. That's why it's going to
accept it and put it in the output. And
then in the next step, it's still going
to go to the second employee and check.
As you can see, we have it already in
the customers. So, SQL going to go and
ignore it. It's not allowed to be in the
output. The same thing for Mary. We have
it as well in the customers. That's why
it will not be presented in the output.
So Michael, we don't have a Michael in
customers. That's why it can be
presented in the output. And as well for
Carol, the same thing. We don't have
Carol as a customer and we're going to
have it in the output. So as you can
see, we will get data only from the
first table and the second table only
going to be used in order to check the
informations from it. So we don't have
in the output any customers, it's only
employees. So now let's check quickly
what going to happen if we switch the
tables. So now we have the customers as
the first table. SQL going to take the
columns from the first table and it's
going to start presenting the customers
informations in the output and going to
go and use the employees only as a
lookup. So do we have Joseph? We don't
have it in the employee. And then Kevin
and Mary we have it already in the
employees and Mark and Anna are not part
of the employees that's why can go and
present the results in the output like
this. So now as you can see SQL is
focusing on the table customers and we
are getting data from the customers not
from the employees. Employees is only as
a check. So with that we understand the
order of the queries is very important
for the exceptions. We will get
different results if we have different
order. All right. So that's all for the
except
operator. Okay. So what is intersect?
Intersect going to go and return only
row that are common in both queries.
It's something very similar to the inner
join and as well here it's going to go
and remove duplicates. So there will be
no duplicates in the output. All right.
Again we have this very simple example
where we have five customers and five
employees and now we're going to combine
them using the intersect. So what
intersect does it going to go and return
common rows between two tables. So how
SQL going to execute it? It's very
simple. SQL going to go and search for
the common values. So what are the
common values? It's given and marry and
SQL going to return only those two
values given and marry and all others
going to be excluded from the results.
It's very simple, right? It's going to
go and return only the common values and
this is how the intersect works in SQL.
Okay, let's have this simple task and it
says find the employees who are also
customers. So we're going to have the
same queries employees and customers but
instead of having except we're going to
go and use intersect. Since we are
finding the common informations between
the employees and customers it's very
simple and straightforward. Let's go and
execute it. And with that we're going to
get the Kevin and Mary. This is the two
persons that are at the same time
employees and customers. And of course
here we don't have to pay attention to
the order of the queries. It's going to
be the same if we say find the customers
who are also employees. So if you go and
just switch for example the customers
with employees you will see that we will
get the exact same results. So it
doesn't matter which query is first
again pay attention to the first query
that define the names. So now let's
understand how is scale execute
intersects behind the scenes. Okay again
our two tables and now we are doing
intersects. So as usual SQL going to go
and take the columns from the first
query and now we're going to go and find
the common data between those two
results. So it's going to do it row by
row. So we have the employee Frank. Do
we have it as a customer? No. So it will
not be in the output. Given brown, we
have it in the employees and as well as
a customer over here. So that's why we
will get it in the output. The same
thing for Mary. So we have Mary as
employee and as well as customer. So
we're going to have it in the output.
Michael and Carol, they are not
customers. They are only employees.
That's why we will not get it in the
output. The same thing goes for the
customers. Joseph, we don't have Mark.
We don't have Anna because they are not
employees. So with that we're going to
get only the common informations between
the two tables or two queries and it
doesn't matter whether we start with
customer or with employees we will get
at the end the same information. All
right so that's all it's very simple
right this is how the intersect works in
SQL.
All right friends, so now we come to the
part where I'm going to show you how I
usually use the set operators in my
projects for data analyszis or for data
engineering. So here are the most
important use cases for the set
operators. All right, the first use case
is combining similar tables before doing
data analyzes. In some scenarios, we
want to generate a report and we end up
writing similar queries on top of
similar tables and we go at the end and
join all the results from the queries in
order to present the final report. And
now instead of doing that what we can do
first we can go and combine all the
similar informations into one table and
then we can do on top of it a query a
data analyzes in order to generate a
report and we can do that using the
union or union all. Let's have few
examples. So let's say that we have four
tables employees, customers, suppliers
and students. So as you can see all of
them are sharing the same informations.
They hold data about persons. So now
let's say that you are generating a
report that requires all the individuals
in the organization in the database. So
what you're going to end up doing is
writing SQL query for the employees,
another one for customers and as well
for the suppliers and the students. And
then you're going to go and merge all
the results from those queries into the
final report. Now the issue with this
setup is that you are having a lot of
queries, a lot of similar queries. So
you have it here four times. And now
what might happen is that you go and
change the logic of the first two
queries and you forget later to do it
for the other two and you will get
really inconsistent data in the reports.
So instead of that what we can do we can
go and use the set operators in order to
combine first all those tables in one
big table. So what we're going to do
we're going to go and use a union in
order to combine those four tables into
the table persons. So we're going to
have it like this. So we will get all
the rows from the employees and put it
in the persons all the rows from the
customers from the suppliers and as well
from the students and put everything in
one big table that holds all the
informations about the individuals that
we have inside our database. And now the
next step after we combine the data now
we write an SQL query in order to
analyze this new big table and the
result going to be presented in the
reports. And now of course the advantage
here is that we have only one SQL query
for the data analyzers on top of this
table instead of having it four times.
And now if you go and change the logic
of the SQL query, it going to be applied
automatically on all the data that we
have in the database. And we have done
already this example where we have
combined the data between the employees
and customers. Another scenario where we
have to combine data before doing any
reporting. That's sometimes the database
developers tend to divide a table one
big table into multiple small tables in
order to optimize the performance. For
example, here splitting the orders by
the year. We have orders 2022 2023. Now
again here if you want to generate a
report in order to analyze the orders
over the years over the time either
you're going to go and make a query for
each of those tables or you're going to
go first combining all those tables into
one table called orders. So what we're
going to do we're going to use a union
between all those tables in order to
generate one central table called the
orders. So all the rows from the first
table and all rows from the next table.
next one and the last one. So, we're
going to put everything in one big table
and once we have the orders, we're going
to go and write analytical skill query
on top of the orders in order to
generate the report. So, as you can see,
it's very important step in order to
prepare the data before doing data
analyszis. Okay. So now let's have the
following SQL task and it says the
orders are stored in separate tables. We
have the orders and orders archive. Now
combine all orders data into one report
without duplicates. Okay. So by looking
to the task we have to combine two
tables orders and orders archive. So
either union or union all. But since the
task says without duplicates that means
we have to go with the union. But now
before we combine any data we have first
to understand the content of the orders
and the orders archive in order to map
the columns correctly. So first we have
to go and explore the two tables. So
let's start with selecting the data from
orders everything semicolon and as well
from the second table sales orders
archive and as well semicolon. So let's
go and execute it. So now in the output
we get two results because we have two
separate queries. The first result is
for the orders and the second one is for
the orders archive. Let me just make it
a little bit bigger. And now as you can
see we have almost identical tables. So
as you can see we have the order ID,
product ID, customer ID. So everything
looks like identical and of course we
can go and check that using the object
explorer on the left side. So we have
here the orders and those are the
columns. And if you go to the orders
archive, you can see that we have the
exact same columns. So that means we can
go and map all columns from orders with
the all columns of orders archive. So
let's go and do that. So I'm just going
to remove all semicolons and then we're
going to go and use the union. So now we
have everything in one query. Let's go
and execute it. Now we will get in the
output one single results, one single
table with all informations from orders
and orders archive. So we have all
orders now in one table and everything
currently is matching. So with that we
have solved the task. We have one result
with all orders. We don't have any
duplicates since we are using union and
we have combined the data. But now we
have one issue with that. This solution,
this query is quick and dirty and
actually it's not following the best
practices. So now the best practices
here is to list clearly all the columns
in each query without using star. All
right. So now let's go and do that. Now
we need a list of all columns from the
table orders and the table orders
archive. And since we have a lot of
columns, what we're going to do, we go
to object explorer, right click on the
table name, and then let's go select the
top thousand rows. So let's click on
that. And now we're going to get a very
simple select statements where we have
all the column names from the table
orders. This is what I usually do if I
need all the columns in the my select
statements. So let's go and copy it and
go back to our query. Then let's go
replace the first star with those
columns. And we're going to do the same
thing as well for the orders archive
since they have the same names. So let's
go and do that as well. So let me just
make this smaller in order to see the
query. So now we have a select for the
table orders with all columns and as
well a select with all columns for the
table orders archive. So let's go and
execute it. And of course now we're
going to go and get the same results.
Now you might ask why we are doing this.
Why didn't we stick with the star? It's
quick. It's simple. Well for the
following reason. So now currently the
status is that everything is matching.
We have 100% identical tables. But what
happened with the time is that we do
development in our solution and we might
go and change the schema of the table
orders. So we might rename stuff, we
might add new columns or maybe switch
the columns. So this means the table
order with the time will not be anymore
identical with the archive. And this is
of course a problem if you are mapping
the data blindly using the star. So now
let me show you what I mean. Let's say
that in this table we are developing the
orders and we just switch those two
columns in the schema for some reason.
So now we have the product ID first and
then the order ID. So let's go and
execute it. Now if you are using star
you will not notice this informations.
But if you are using script you're going
to see immediately that here we have
first the order ID and then product ID.
And here we have the opposite. So it's
more clear listing the columns than
using the star. And now as you can see
in the output you can see that we have a
problem that here we have order ids and
then suddenly we have something like the
product ID. So we're going to have
incorrect data which leads to incorrect
analyzes. So here the best practices to
not use the star and to clearly list all
the columns. Now one more technique that
I usually use once I'm combining data is
that I add the source of the data inside
the query. So what I mean with that now
you can see that we have here two orders
with the order ID one they are not
duplicates they are completely different
informations and that's because they
come from different tables. So what I
usually do I go and add the source of
each record it's really nice information
for the analytics for the users to
understand where these records come
from. So how we going to do that? We're
going to have for example on the first
column the following word let's say
orders and we're going to call it let's
say that's source table and we're going
to do the same thing as well in the
second query. Right? So the source table
here is not the orders it's the orders
archive. So I'm just adding a static
columns to my query in order to see the
source of the table. So now we have here
two different values. And let's go and
execute it. And now you see we have
created a new column called source table
where it has only two values. We have
the orders and the orders archive. Let's
go and sort the data by the order ID. So
order by order ID. So let's go and
execute it. And now you can see it very
clearly. The first order order ID one
comes from the table orders and the
second one comes from the orders
archive. So this is really nice
information that you can add to your
data once you are combining multiple
tables. So that's all about this use
case on how to combine data between
different
tables. All right. Now we have another
use case for the set operators. It's
more for data engineers. We can use the
except in order to find the delta
between two batches of data. For
example, data engineers build data
pipelines in order to load daily new
data from the source systems to a data
warehouse or a data lake. Now, in those
data pipelines, we have to build a logic
in order to identify what are the new
data that is generated from the source
system in order to insert it in the data
warehouse. One way to do it is to use
the set operator except in order to
compare the current data with the
previous load. Let's have a very simple
example. So in the day number one we
have two customers one and two. So what
going to happen in this day we're going
to go and load those two customers into
the data warehouse. So in the data
warehouse we will get as well one and
two. So this is for the first day
nothing is crazy. We just load the data
as it is. Now for the second day we will
get the new data from the source system
and it's going to look like this. So now
if you check the second day you can see
that we have again the customer number
one we have already loaded to the data
warehouse. So we have it as the previous
day but we have a new customer ID number
three. So now in order to load only the
new data we don't need to load again the
customer number one. What we can do? We
can do an accept between the day number
two with the previous load with the day
number one. So now if we simply do an
accept between those two sets we're
going to go and identify the new data
that is existing in the source system
which is only the record number three.
So now what going to happen if we do
except between day two and day one we
will get one record the new record that
we're going to go and insert it inside
our data warehouse. So as you can see
this set operator except is very
powerful in order to compare two sets
and not only for data analysis we can
use it as you can see for data
engineering in order to identify what is
the new data that is generated from the
sources in order to insert it inside our
data warehouse.
Okay, one more use case for the set
operators that I personally use a lot in
my project is that if you are doing data
migrations, you can use the accept in
order to check the data quality and more
specifically we can use it in order to
check the data completeness. Okay, so we
have the following scenario where we are
doing data migrations between two
databases. So let's say that we would
like to move this table from database A
to database B. So we're going to go and
load the table to the new database. And
now what is very important after you
move the data is that to check whether
all the records did move from database A
to database B we are not missing
anything even one record. So we want to
do data completeness test and there are
many methods on how to do this test. One
of them is to use that set operator
except. So how we going to do it? We're
going to do an except between the table
from database A and the table from
database B in order to find any record
that is still in database A which is not
migrated to the database B. And of
course the best result is that we will
not get anything. The result should be
empty. If we get an empty that means all
the rows from database A exists in the
database B. And now of course we are not
done yet. We want to do the comparison
but the way around. We want to find any
new rows that is in database B that we
don't find in database A. Those two
tables must be identical. So now what
we're going to do, we're going to do an
except but the first table going to be
from the database B. And then we're
going to compare it with the database A.
And we have the same expectation. The
output should be as well empty. And now
after doing the except twice for both
sides and we are getting empty in the
results. That means those two tables are
identical and we are not missing
anything. So this is another amazing use
case for the set operators in order to
improve the quality of your data
migrations and in order to do data
completeness
test. Okay. So now let's have a quick
summary about the set operators. So the
set operator is going to go and combine
the rows of multiple queries, multiple
tables into one single result. And we
have four different types of the asset
operators. The first one is the union
where it's going to go and combine all
the rows but without including any
duplicates. The second one we have the
union all it's very similar. And the
third one we have the except it's going
to show all the rows from the first
query that cannot be found in the second
query. And the fourth one we have the
intersect where it's going to show the
common rows between two queries. And of
course we have SQL rules in order to use
the set operators. Both of the queries
should have the same number of columns,
the same data types and the order of
columns. And the last rule, don't forget
that the first query controls the
aliases, the name of the columns and the
data types of the entire result. And we
have found amazing use cases for the set
operators. Like for example, using union
and union all in order to combine
similar informations into one big table.
Or we can go and use the amazing except
operator in order to compare two
different results in order to find the
differences between them. And I usually
use it in order to do data quality
checks to test the data completeness.
And another use case as a data engineer
you can go and implement the except in
your logic in your data pipelines in
order to identify what are the new data
that must be inserted in your system.
Okay my friends. So with that we have
learned all the set operators that we
have inside SQL. And with that you have
learned how to combine your data from
multiple tables using SQL. So we are
done with this chapter. Now we're going
to go to the right side. So now we're
going to start talking about the
functions in SQL. And here we have two
big families. The first one is the row
level or the single value functions. And
the second one we have the aggregate
analytical functions. So let's start
with the first one the rowle functions.
And here we can group them into multiple
categories. And we will start now with
the string functions. But first let's
understand what is exactly functions and
why do we need them in SQL. So let's
go. Okay. So what is exactly function
and why we need it. Now again we have
our data inside the table. Now there is
like a lot of stuff that you can do with
your data. So sometimes you have to
change the values of your data like
doing data manipulation or you want to
do some aggregations and analyzes. So
maybe you want to analyze your data and
find insights and maybe build reports
and sometimes you might find bad data
inside your tables and you want to clean
that up. So you want to do data
cleansing and sometimes you have to do
data transformations and data
manipulation on our data in order to
solve some SQL tasks and in SQL in order
to solve those tasks we have functions.
So again what is exactly a function? It
is a built-in code block that accepts an
input value. Then the function going to
go and process this value and it going
to return a result an output value. So
you give an input value do some
transformations and give an output. And
we can group the functions into two big
categories. The first one we call it
single row functions. So you give the
function only one value and at the
return you will get as well one value.
So the input for the function going to
be only one single value like maria and
the output of the function going to be
as well single row value. So one value
in one value out. And now the other
category of functions we call it
multirow functions. So for example if
you have the function sum this function
accept multiple rows multiple values
like it gets 30 10 20 40 the function is
then going to go and summarize all those
rows and return in the output only one
value. The summarization of all those
values going to be 100. So the input is
multiple rows and the output is one
single value. So those are the two main
categories of functions in scale.
Now my friends you have to understand
something about the functions that you
can go and nest functions together. So
you can use multiple functions together
in order to manipulate one value. And
this technique is not only in SQL in any
programming language. So let's have this
example. We have the function left. It's
going to go and extract like few
characters. Let's say two characters. So
the input for this function let's say
it's Maria. This value going to enter
the function. The function is going to
go and extract the first two characters.
And in the output we will get only two
characters m a. So this is one function.
We have an input and output. Now you
might say you know what we have multiple
steps on this value. So the first step
we want to extract the first two
characters using the lift function. But
we have a second step. So we want to
transform this output into a lowercase
characters. So we have another function
lower and the input for this second
function will be the output of the first
function. So ma it is at the same time
output and input for another function.
So the lower function going to take this
value and convert it into lowerase
character. So it's like inside the
factory the materials going to be
processed into multiple stations and the
output of one station going to be the
input for the next station. And this is
exactly what we can do with the
functions. So now how we going to build
that? The first step is to start with
the first function. So this is simple
one function. Now for the next step what
you're going to do on the left side
you're going to write lower and put the
whole thing in parenthesis. So now the
whole thing the first function going to
be inside another function and with that
you have nested one function in another
and of course if you need a third
function like for example the length
what you're going to do you're going to
put the whole thing again between two
parentheses. So now that means the
output of the lift going to go to the
lower and the output of the lower going
to go to the length. So it is very
simple and the order of the execution
for this will start always in the inner
function. So the lift function going to
be executed first and then the outside
function the lower and the last function
that's going to be executed is the
length. This is how the nested functions
works in SQL or in any programming
language. Now my friends in SQL we have
a lot of functions that's why we have to
group them as well into subcategories.
Like if you are talking about the single
row functions, we have functions for the
string values and as well for the
numeric, the date and time and as well
functions in order to handle the nulls.
And if you are talking about the
multirow functions, here we have
basically two groups. The first one is
the simple aggregate functions. Those
are the basics in order to aggregate
your data. And we have another advanced
one. We call it the window functions or
sometime we call it analytical
functions. So now if I'm looking to
those two groups and now my friends it
is very important to understand those
functions because using them you can do
whatever you want with your data and if
I'm looking to those two groups the
single row functions those stuff here
they are functions in order to
manipulate and prepare the data for the
second group. So if you are thinking
about data engineers and data analysts
the data engineers going to go and
prepare the data in SQL using the single
row functions. So you're going to use
them in order to clean up, transform,
manipulate your data in order to prepare
it for the analyzes. And if you are data
analyst, you will be mostly using the
aggregate functions in almost every
task. So I really see it like this. The
single row functions for data engineers
and multirow functions for data
analysts. And my friends, what we're
going to do in this course, we're going
to visit each of those subgroups one by
one, exploring the functions,
understanding how they work and when
we're going to use them. So let's start
with the first group, the string
functions. And here we're going to learn
how to manipulate the string values. So
let's
go. Okay. So now since we have a lot of
string functions, I'm going to go and
divide them into categories based on the
purpose. So for example, we have a group
of functions that's going to go and
manipulate the string values. So we have
concatenation, upper, lower, replace,
and so on. And another group where we
have only one function. It is where we
can do calculations on the string
values. And the last group, it is all
about how to extract something from a
string value. And here we have three
functions left, right, substring. So now
let's go and start with the first group
about the data manipulation. And the
first function we have here
concat. All right. So what is exactly
concat or concatenation? It's going to
go and combine multiple string values
into one value. So if you have multiple
things you can put everything in one
value. So let's have a very simple
example. Okay. So now let's say that you
have one value called Michael. So here
you have a first name and you have
totally separated value for the last
name another column where you have a
value like Scott. And now you say you
know what it makes no sense to have the
first name separated from the last name.
I would like to go and combine them in
one value. So you can go and use the
concat in order to combine those two
values or multiple values into one
single value like Michael Scott.
I think that pretty much sums it up. So
it is nicer to see the full name in one
value instead of having like two columns
for that. So that's it. This is why we
need the concatenations. Now let's go
back to scale in order to try that out.
Okay. So now we have the following task.
Show a list of customers first names
together with their country in one
column. So that means we have to make a
list of customers and we have to combine
two columns in one. So let's start
writing the query. Select. We need the
first name, the country from the table
customers. So first let's go and execute
this. Now as you can see we have list of
customers but the issue here the first
name and the countries those two
informations are in different columns
but the task says they should be in one
column. So now in order to combine those
two things we have to use the
concatenate function. So concat. So I'm
going to start with the first argument.
It's going to be the first name and then
the country like this. And we're going
to give it a name. Let's call it like
this name country. Now let's go ahead
and execute it. Now in the output you
can see we have a new column. It's
called name country and we have both of
the informations in one column. So we
have Maria, Germany, join USA. But it
doesn't really look good because there's
like no spacing between them. Now we can
go and make some separation between them
by just adding one more thing in between
like for example maybe a space. So now
we are concatenating the first name
together with a space this over here and
then the country. So let's go and
execute it. Now as you can see we have
nice separations between the first name
and the country. And of course you can
go and add different separations like
maybe my notes or underscore and you
will get the same effect. So with that
we have a list of customers where we
have the first name together with the
country in one column. As you can see
it's very simple. This is how you
combine two columns in one. It is really
nice and easy transformation. Okay. So
that's all about the concatenation in
scale. Next we're going to talk about
two functions. The upper and the
lower. Okay. So what is upper function?
It's going to go and converts all the
characters of a string to an uppercase.
It's going to make everything
capitalized. And the lower function is
exactly the opposite. It's going to go
and convert everything to a lower case.
So let's have very simple example for
those two functions. Okay. So now we
have like three values with different
cases. The first one where you have only
the first character capitalized and the
rest is lowered and then the same value
but everything is lowered and a third
one where you have everything with an
uppercase. Now if you go and apply the
function upper to those three values
what going to happen for the first value
going to go and turn it into an
uppercase. So everything going to be
capitalized not only the first
character. And now for the second value
going to turn it as well to completely
capitalized. So all the characters going
to change. And for the last value it is
already capitalized. So in the output
you will get the same value. So actually
nothing going to happen for that. So
this is simply the uppercase. Now let's
see what can happen if you use the lower
case. For the first value only the first
character going to be changed and then
you will have everything in lower case.
The second value it is already a
lowerase value. So if you apply lower
case nothing going to happen. You will
get the same value. But for the last one
everything here is capitalized and if
you apply lower case all the characters
going to convert to a lower case. So my
friends this is very simple. Let's go
back to your skill in order to practice
that. Okay. So we have the following
task and it says transform the
customer's first name to lowerase. So
now as you can see the first names here
the first character is a capital the
rest is lowerase. So now in this task we
have to convert the whole thing into
lower case. So let's go and do that.
It's very simple. We're going to say
lower first name and let's go and call
it low name. So that's it. Let's go and
execute it. Now if you go and compare
the lower name with the first name, you
can see all the characters now in the
lower case. So that's it for the task.
We have transformed the first name to
lower case. All right. The next task is
exactly the opposite. Transform the
customer's first name to uppercase. So
let's go and have a new column. We're
going to say upper then the first
name as app name. So that's it. It's
very simple. Let's go and execute. Now
you can see in the output we have a new
column called up name and inside it we
have the first name but now all the
characters in upper case. So this is how
you convert the case to lower or to
upper in SQL. Okay. So that's all about
the upper and the lower. Next we're
going to talk about very interesting
function. It is the
trim. So the trim function going to go
and remove the leading and trailing
spaces in your string values. So it's
going to go and get rid of the empty
spaces at the start and at the end of a
string value. Let's have very simple
example. Okay. So now we're going to
have different scenarios. The first one
you can have like a value join where you
don't have any spaces and this is the
normal case. But sometimes you might
have it like this where at the start you
have a leading space. You have an empty
space or sometimes we call it white
space. In another scenario the space
might be at the end of the word. So here
we call it trailing space and in another
scenario you might have both of them.
This is really bad. where at the start
you have the leading space and at the
end you have the trailing space. And of
course you might not have only one
space, you might have multiple spaces
depend on how long did the user press
the space, right? So of course my
friends spaces are really evil and this
makes no sense to have it in your data.
Now what you have to do is to do data
cleansing. We have to clean up this miss
and you have the best function in order
to clean up the data. You have the trim.
So if you apply trim for the first
value, nothing going to happen because
everything is clean and we don't have
any spaces. Now if you apply it for the
second case where you have a leading
space if you do that SQL going to go and
remove this space. The same thing for
the trailing space. So if you have space
at the end the trim function going to
find it and clean that up. And if you
have it at the start and at the end then
it's as well no problem. It's going to
go and clean that up. And as well the
trim function can go and clean multiple
spaces. So if you have like five spaces
10 spaces at the end or at the start the
trim function going to go and clean that
up. So this is how the trim works. And
now let's go back to our scale in order
to find out whether we have any spaces.
Okay. So now we have a very tricky and
interesting task. It says find the
customers whose first name contains
leading or trailing spaces. So now by
looking to those values we have to find
any spaces inside the customer's name.
Now by just looking to this results you
will not find any white spaces because
it's really hard to see especially if it
is like trailing spaces. Now we have to
write query order to detect any spaces
in the names. So how we can do that?
Okay. So now think about it a little bit
and I can give you a hint. You can use
the function trim in order to remove any
white spaces and you have to use it
inside a wear clause. So what we're
going to do we're going to say where. So
now we have to build a condition to
detect any spaces. So if you are saying
if the first name is not equal to itself
first name after applying a trim. So
after trimming the first name if it is
not equal to the first name so that
means there was spaces. So again what is
going on here? Let's go for Maria. If
Maria has no nulls if you trim this
value nothing going to happen. The value
going to stay exactly like before
because there is no white spaces. But if
in Maria there is any space inside it.
Trimming the value will not be equal to
the first name if it contains any
spaces. So if the column is not equal to
the same column after trimming it that
means there is spaces. So let's go and
execute it. And now we can see in the
output we have one customer John where
we have this situation. Now if you don't
believe me or you don't follow me here
we can have another easier check. So
let's go and comment this out and let's
have a look to our first names. Now we
can go and calculate the length of the
first name like we have done before. So
length name and let's go and execute it.
Now if you can see here Maria we have
five characters but John we have here
four characters but the length is five
and that's because we have somewhere
space and the space going to count as a
character. So here there is like
something wrong right and you can check
the others as well everything is
matching but only John we have here an
issue and now in order to see this more
clearly we're going to use two functions
the trim and the length. So first let's
go and trim the first
name. And after trimming the values, I'm
going to calculate the length. So we are
nesting together the trim and the
length. And I'm going to call it length.
Trim name. So let's go and execute it.
Now we can see the length before
trimming any value. And we can see the
length after trimming the values. So you
can see over here that join before
trimming is five and after trimming is
four. So we have here an issue. Now we
can make things more clear where we can
go and subtract the length of the first
name with the length of the first name.
But first we trim the values. So here we
can call it maybe a flag or something.
So let's go and execute it. Now by
looking to the flag it is really easy to
now to see if we have a zero then
everything is fine. We don't have any
white spaces. But if we have higher than
zero like here one then this is an
indicator that we have a white space.
Either you do it like this where the
first name is not equal the first name
after trimming or you use more
complicated solution where you say where
and I'm going to remove this from here
the length of the first name is not
equal to the length after trimming so
not equal so if you go and execute it
you will get exactly again join so this
is how we detect any empty spaces inside
our data using the trim function or
maybe as well using the length but I
really prefer the first solution it is
way easier using one function. All
right, so that's all about how to remove
the empty spaces using the trim. Next,
we're going to talk about very important
function called
replace. Now the replace function going
to go and replace a specific character.
So that means we have something old and
we want to replace it with something
new. Let's have a very simple example to
understand it. All right. So now imagine
we have a phone number where the data is
splitted by a dash. Now let's say that I
don't like to have the dash in my data.
I would like to have slash like any
other special character. Now in order to
replace the dash, we can use the
function replace. So we have to specify
for SQL two things. The old value the
dash with a new value the slash. So if
you do that in the output it's going to
go and remove all those dashes between
the numbers and the replacement going to
be the dash between them. So it's very
simple, right? All what you are doing is
replacing an old value with a new value
and that's why we call it replace. But
we can use this function as well in
order to remove something not only we
replace and you can do that by not
specifying anything in the new value
like just the single quotes and with
that it's going to be nothing a blank.
So now what's going to happen is still
going to go and replace the dash with a
blank and that means I'm just removing
the dashes from the output. So if you do
it you will remove the dash and you will
get only numbers. So if the replacement
going to be a blank then that means this
function will be replacing any value
that you specify. So this is exactly how
it works and this is why we use the
replace function in SQL. Now let's go
back in order to practice. So let's do
the same example. This time we're going
to go and select from a static value. So
we're going to get 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0.
So if you go and execute it, you can see
we are getting the phone number. Now
let's go and remove the dashes from this
value. So let's have a new line and we
start with replace. The first thing that
you have to specify for SQL the value
itself. So let's go and get the value.
This is the first argument. The second
argument going to be the old value. So
the old value going to be the dash. And
now the third argument will be the
replacement. And since we want to remove
it, we don't want to replace it with
anything. We will have just single
quotes and nothing between them. So
there's no space between those single
quotes. Now we can go and rename stuff
like this is the phone. And this is a
clean phone. Let's go and execute it.
Now, as you can see in the output of the
function, we don't have any dashes
between the numbers. And you can go and
test stuff. Like for example, I can go
and add a slash and execute it. You will
see slashes between them. So you can go
and try multiple stuff. So this is one
nice use case for the replace function.
Now there is another use case for the
replace function is that sometimes in my
data file names going to be stored like
for example, let's say reports.t txt and
now let's say that I would like to
change the file format from .txt to CSV.
Now how we're going to do that we're
going to go with a new line say replace
and then the first argument going to be
the value. So let's take our value from
here and now what is the old value it's
going to be the txt and I want to
replace it with another format with
another extension. So it's going to be
the CSV. So we're going to say this is
the new file name and this is the old
file name. So let's go and execute it.
And now as you can see in the output SQL
did replace the txt with SCSV. This is
as well where I use the replace function
in my projects. So my friends the
replace function is really fun and those
are two nice use cases for the replace.
All right. So that's all about the
replace function in SQL and with that we
have covered the whole datamations. Now
in the next group we're going to talk
about the calculations. And here we have
only one function the
length. Now the length function it's
very simple. It's going to go and count
how many characters you have in one
value. So you are calculating the length
of a value. Let's have very simple
example to understand it. Okay. So now
let's say that we have the value Maria.
If you apply the length function for
that what's going to happen? It's going
to go and start counting how many
characters we have inside this value. So
the m is 1. a 2 3 4 5 in the output you
will get the number five. So five is the
length or the total number of characters
in this value. Now let's say that you
have a number like 350. If you go and
apply the length function still is going
to go and count how many digits do we
have. The three is 1 5 2 3. So the total
length for that going to be three. So
you can apply it even for numbers and
not only that you can go and apply it on
a date value. So let's say that you have
the following date 2026 1st 23. So SQL
going to go and count each digit each
character even the underscores not only
the numbers underscore is as well a
digit right? So the total length of this
date it's going to be 10. So you can
apply any data type to the links
function and in the output you will get
always a number. That's it. This is how
you can count the number of characters
in any value. Let's go back to scale in
order to practice that. Okay. So now we
have the task calculate the length of
each customer's first name. So it is
very simple. We're going to go and apply
the function length len to the column
first name and we're going to call it
length name. So let's go and execute it.
And with that as you can see we are
getting in the output numbers and these
numbers are the number of characters of
each name of our customers. So this is
how we calculate the length and that's
it for this group. Now moving on to the
next one. It's going to be very
interesting. Now we're going to talk
about how to extract something from a
string value. And here we're going to
cover now two functions the left and the
right. Now the lift function going to go
and extract specific number of
characters from the start of a string
value. So if you want to get few
characters at the beginning of a value,
you can use the lift. But now the right
function is exactly the opposite. It's
going to go and extract specific number
of characters from the end of string
value. So if you want few characters
from the end of your value, you can use
right. Now in order to apply the left or
the right function, you have to give SQL
two things. The value where you want to
extract a part from it and the number of
characters, how many characters you want
to extract and this is the same for the
left and the right. Now let's say that
we have again this value Mariam. And now
if the task says I would like to extract
the first two characters and since we
are talking about the starting position,
we're going to use the lift function.
And since it says two characters, we're
going to go with the two. So it's going
to start counting M is 1, A is two and
after that it's going to stop and make a
cut and it's going to go and return the
two characters M A. So we are counting
from the left side going to the right
side. Right now if your task says
extract the last two characters here we
are talking about the end position of
your value and for that we're going to
use the right function since we are
approaching from the right side and
since we want only two characters the
number of characters going to be two. So
this time going to start counting from
the right side moving to the left side.
So A is one, I is two and that's it.
Then SQL going to stop and extract only
those two characters. I A. So if you
want to extract data at the starting
position, you use the left. But if you
want to extract characters from the end
position of your value, then you use the
right function. Now let's go back to
scaler in order to practice. Okay. So
now we have the following task. Retrieve
the first two characters of each first
name. So we just need the first two
characters. Since we are coming from the
left side, we can go and use the
function left. So it's very simple.
First name and we need only two
characters. So two. So we're going to
call it first to character. Let's go
ahead and execute it. And now you can
see in the output we have two characters
MA. Now with John we have only G because
we have a leading space. Well, you can
leave it like this or you can transform
it. And then George we have G and so on.
So with that we are getting the first
three characters. Now in order to fix it
for John what we're going to do we're
going to say trim first and then apply
the lift. So with that we are getting
rid of all white spaces and then we
apply the lift. So with that everything
looks perfect. So for John we have jo.
So this is how we can get the first two
characters of a column. Now let's move
to the next one. The task says retrieve
the last two characters of each first
name. So this time we need the last two.
So we are coming from the right side. So
we're going to do it like this. We're
going to say
write first name and then as well too.
So last two character let's go and
execute it. And now as you can see in
the output we have new column where we
have the last two characters from the
first name. So we have here I a er and
for John as well working and that's
because we don't have any trailing
spaces but if you have any trailing
spaces then go and use that trim
function. All right so that's all for
the left and right and now we're going
to go to the last function. we have the
substring. So the substring going to go
and extract a part of a string at a
specified position. So this time we
don't want something from the beginning
or the end. We want something like in
the middle. So we want to specify the
starting position and we want to extract
few characters from there. So let's have
very simple example to understand it.
Now in order to use the substring you
need three things. The first one is the
value itself where you want to extract a
specific part from it and then you have
to specify the starting position where
SQL going to start extracting the
characters that you want and as well SQL
needs the links how many characters we
have to extract. So now let's say that
we have the following task after the
second character extract two characters.
So from reading this you can see we
specified the starting position this is
the second character and the length
going to be the two characters. So let's
have this example. Well, if you have
Maria, so now we have to specify the
starting position. Now we are saying
after the second character. So the first
character m is one. Then a is two. After
two, we got the position number three,
right? So starting from R. So that means
we have to specify for SQL three because
the starting position going to be number
three. This is after the two. Now we
want only two characters. So we want the
R and the I. If you give this to SQL
Maria starting position three and the
length two, SQL can go and extract the
two characters the R I. And this is
exactly what we want. We want two
characters after the second position,
the second character. So with that, we
didn't extract something from the left
or from the right. We extracted at
specific position. And this is exactly
why we need the substring. Now let's
make it a little bit more difficult
where we're going to say after the
second character extract everything all
the characters. So not only RA I I would
like RA I A. So now nothing's changed
about the starting position. It's going
to stay at three. But now if you are
looking to this value and you want to
extract everything starting from R. That
means you have to specify the length of
three. But this is not really good
because let's have another value in the
same column. So we have Martin. So the
starting position going to be as well R.
And now the lengths going to be
different. So we have here four
characters. So now the length is not
anymore three. It is four. But you have
to specify something at the end for SQL.
You can go for four. That's fine for
Maria as well. But if you have a lot of
values, it's going to be really hard to
specify exactly the correct length.
That's why instead of specifying a
static number like three or four, we can
use another function. So now my friends,
if you use the length function, you will
get the total number of characters,
right? So for Maria, you will get five.
For Martin, you will get six. And those
numbers are okay to use in the length
because they are more than what we need.
And that's totally fine. So if you are
saying okay for Maria start from the
third position and cut for me five
characters SQL going to find only three
but you will not get an error. So you
are extracting more than you need and
you will always get all the characters
after the starting position. So this is
a little trick that we use in order to
make the links dynamic where we cannot
find one value that we can use in all
scenarios. And now let's go back to SQL
in order to practice the substring.
Okay. So now we have the following task
and it says retrieve a list of customers
first names after removing the first
character. So now don't ask me why but
for some reason we don't want to see the
first character of the first names. We
want to remove it. So how we can do
that? We cannot use the left or the
right. We have to go with the substring
because it is little bit more
complicated. So substring and let's go
and get and the first argument going to
be the value. So it comes from the first
name and then the second argument is the
starting position. So where we want to
start since it is saying I want all the
characters after the first character. So
that means we will be starting from the
position number two. So for example
Maria here the first character M
position number one and we want to start
our substring from the position number
two. So that was so that was the easy
part. Now the next one the question is
how much characters we want to leave. So
do we leave here like four characters
like in Maria we have four characters
but in John we have only three then the
next one is four and so on. So if you go
for example with four and let's call it
sub name. So we make it static. What can
happen? It's going to work for some
scenarios like Maria. We have here Ara
and for better we are getting it. But
for Martin it is not working. We are not
getting the last N because it has like
five characters after the first one. And
by just looking to the result as you can
see we have here one issue with John and
that's because the first character is an
empty string. So this is really
annoying. So that's why we use the trim
first just to get rid of all those white
spaces. And now you can see it's working
fine. So we are not getting the J. We
have everything after the first
character. So now instead of having this
static what we're going to do we're
going to make it variable. So we're
going to go and use the length of the
first name. So with that we make sure we
have enough length to extract. And this
can work for any value inside the first
name even if the name is like 20
characters. So let's go and execute. And
now you can see for Martin it is now
working. So we have here like five
characters after the M. And here we have
four characters after the M as well. And
here we have three characters after the
G. So it is working completely and it is
full dynamic. So this is the trick by
using the links together with the
substring. And as you can see now we are
using three functions in one go. We have
the length, we have the trim and we have
the substring. And this is what happens
in scale. we use multiple functions
together in order to solve like complex
tasks. So this is how you can extract a
substring from a string. All right. So
that's all about the substring and with
that we have covered a lot of very
important string functions in SQL and
now you have enough tools in order to
manipulate the string values in your
data. Okay my friends. So with that we
have learned how to manipulate your
string values inside SQL using the
string functions. Now we will move to
the second one. you will learn how to
manipulate the numbers, the numeric
values. So let's
go. Okay. So now let's have this example
3.516. Now let's say that you want to
apply the function round and you are
using two decimal places. So what going
to happen? It's going to go and keep
only two digits after the decimal point.
So five and one and the third digit
after the decimal six. It will decide
whether the number going to round up or
stay as it is. And now since six is
higher than five. So that means SQL
going to go around the numbers up. So
instead of having 51 we will get 52. And
after that the third digit going to
reset to zero. So in the out you will
get
3.52. Now let's say that you have done
round but only for one decimal place.
Now it's still going to go and keep only
one decimal place and that is the five.
And the second digit this time going to
decide whether we round up or not. And
now since one is less than five, there
is no need to round up and the five
going to stay as it is. It will not turn
to six. So there is no round up and the
digits after the five going to reset to
zero. So we're going to get 3.5. Now
let's say that you say round zero. So
that means I don't want to see any
digits after the decimal point. So now
SQL going to go and check the first
digit after the decimal point, the five.
This one going to decide whether the
three going to turn to four or not. And
now since we have five it is good enough
to round the number because either five
or above five going to round the
numbers. So that's why it's going to be
a round up and SQL going to return at
the end four and all the digits after
the decimal points going to be reset to
zero. So this is exactly how the round
function works in SQL. So now let's see
how we can do that in SQL. Okay. So now
let's go and practice about the number
functions. So what we're going to do
we're going to write SQL select but this
time we will not select any data from
the database. We going to practice using
our static value like for example the
value 3 dot 516. So let's go and execute
it. So with that I have this decimal
number. Now let's go and start
practicing the round function. So now
let's go and round this number
3.516 and this time we are rounding to
decimals. So let's go and call it round
two and let's go and execute it. So as
you can see in the output we are
rounding two decimal places and we have
the two because as we learned the six
going to go and round it up. Now let's
go and do the same thing for one. So
let's round one execute. And as you can
see in the output we are rounding to one
decimal. So we have the five and
everything is zero. And we don't have
six here because the one is lower than
five and it will not round up the
numbers. And let's and round by the
zero. it is rounding it to an integer to
the four and all the decimal digits are
zero and we have four because we have
five and five going to round up the
number. So as you can see it is really
nice and this is how we round numbers in
SQL. Now there is another number
function which is really cool called APS
or the absolute what it going to do it's
going to go and convert any negative
number to a positive. So let me show you
what I mean. Let's go and say we have
like minus 10. So this is a negative
number. But if I say APS, so the
absolute of the minus 10, what I will
get? I will get a positive number. So
it's like giving us the absolute of any
number or in other words, it is like
converting the negative to a positive.
And if the number is already positive,
nothing going to happen. So if I say the
absolute of the 10, I will get as well a
10. So this is really nice and cool
function that is really important in
order to transform numbers in many
scenarios like if you have mistakes on
your database like let's say minus sales
makes no sense to have sales that is
minus. So in order to correct the data
we can use the APS in order to convert
all the negative numbers to a positive.
So this is really nice cool and easy
function to learn. All right my friends.
So that's all for the numeric functions.
We have covered two very simple
functions and now in the next topic we
have a lot of functions about how to
manipulate the date and time in SQL. So
let's
go. So what is a date? If you take a
look at calendar and you pick any date,
for example, August 20th,
2025, this date could represent an event
like a birth date. Happy birthday.
Happy birthday.
or a project deadline at your work and
mainly it has three components. The
first part is a fourdigit number
indicating the year. Then the next
component it is the month. So normally
we represent the month with a number
between 1 and 12. And the last component
is the day. This is a number between 1
and 31 depending on the month. Now in
database we call this structure of those
three components a date. So this is what
we mean with dates in SQL. All right.
All right. So now let's move to the next
one. What is time? Time refers to a
specific point within a day. Like for
example, we have 18:00, 55 minutes, and
45 seconds. So this structure has as
well three components. The first one we
call it the hours. It is as well a
number between 0 and 23 indicating the
hour of the day. Then the next one, it
is the minutes. This is a number between
0 and 59. Moving on to the last
component, we have the second. This is
again the same thing a number between 0
and 59. So now this structure with those
three components we call it in databases
and SQL a time. So this is what we mean
with the time. Now to the last type if
you go and combine both the date
together with the time and you put them
side by side you will get a new
structure and a new name in the
databases and we call it usually time
stamp. This name is used in many
databases like Oracle, Postgress and
MySQL. But in the SQL server, we have
another name for that. We call it date
time. So again, it's very simple. The
date time or time stamp has the date
information together with the time
information. So here in this example, we
have six components from left to right
and here we have like a hierarchy in
this structure. So we start with the
highest which is the year. Then we have
the month, the day and then we continue
to the hour, minutes and seconds. So
those are the three different types
about date and time informations in SQL.
We have the date alone or the time alone
or together in the date time. All right,
let's explore now the data that we have
inside our database searching for date
and time informations. Now let's go to
the table orders and if you go and
expand it, you will find here two
columns having the data type dates. So
we have the order dates with the date
and as well the shipping date with the
data type dates. And if you check the
last column, the creation date, this one
is date time 2. So now let's go and
query those informations in order to
understand the structure. I'm just going
to select the order ID, the order date,
and the ship
date and the creation
time from sales orders and from is big.
So let's go and execute it. Now if you
go and check both order date and ship
date, you can find that here we have
only the structure or the informations
about the date and we have nothing about
the time. So again here we have a year,
month and day and that's why they have
the data type date. Now let's go and
check the creation time. Not only we
have the date information but as well we
have the time information. So it start
with the date information year, month,
day and then we have hour, minute and
seconds and then we have fractions of
the seconds, milliseconds and so on. So
this is how the date time or time stamp
looks like in databases and this is how
the date looks
like. All right my friends now in SQL I
can say that we have three different
sources in order to query the dates. The
first one is dates that are stored
inside our database like we saw here in
those columns like the order date,
shipping date, creation time. All those
are columns that holds this informations
and they are stored inside our database.
So this is the first source of dates
that we can get inside our queries. Let
me just remove those stuff and let's
stick with the creation time. So let's
just execute it. So those are date and
time informations stored inside our
database. The second type is a
hard-coded date string that we can use
inside our queries. Let me show you an
example. So now if we go to a new line,
I can go and define a date like this. So
2025 August 20th. So that in this string
we have hardcoded a date that is static
for all rows. Let me just call it
hardcoded and let's go and execute it.
Now we can see in the output we're going
to get a static date for all rows. So
this going to be the same for all rows
inside our table. So this value is not
stored inside our database. This value I
just added to our query and hardcoded
it. So sometimes in queries we define
our dates that's going to be used maybe
later in calculations and so on. Now the
third source of getting dates inside our
query is using the function get date.
Get date is the first and the most
important function that we use in SQL.
It's going to go and return the current
date and time at the moment of executing
the query. So let's try that out. I'm
going to go and get a new line. So get
dates. It's very simple. It doesn't
accept any values inside the function.
So it's going to be empty. So let's call
it today. All right. Let's go and
execute it. And of course, we're going
to get different results because the get
date now is the date and the time that
I'm recording this video. So currently
it is July 18, 2024. And I'm recording
this around 20 p.m. So as you can see,
this going to be as well repeated for
each row. We're going to get always the
same value. So again, this depend on the
execution of that query. So during the
tutorial, you're going to learn a lot
about the get date and we're going to
use it in a lot of functions. So those
are the three different sources of
getting date information inside your
query either from a column inside our
database or hardcoded using a string.
And the third one is using the get date
in order to get the current date and
time informations at the moment of the
query
execution. Nice. Now we have a clear
understanding what is date and time in
SQL. The next question is how to
manipulate those informations using SQL
functions. Okay. Now we have our date
August 20th, 2025. One of the things
that we can do with the date is we can
go and extract different parts of the
date. For example, we are interested
only on the year. So we can go and
extract only the year part. Or if you
are interested in the month, you can go
and extract the month and you will get
August. And of course, we can go and
extract the day and we will get the 20.
So this is the first thing that we can
do. We can extract the parts of the
dates. Now another thing that we can do
is we can go and change the date format.
So instead of having like a small minus
between those date parts, we can go and
split them using slash. We can even
start first with the month August then
20 the day and then the year but having
only the short form of the year 25 or we
can go and change the format where we
say we don't need any special character
we just leave it as a space. So as you
can see we are changing and manipulating
the format of the date. Another category
or task we can go and do date
calculations. So we can go and take our
date and add to it for example 3 years
or we can go and find the differences
between two dates like we are doing a
subtraction or let's say minus and we
will get for example 30 days. So we can
go and add stuff subtract stuff or find
differences between two dates. It's like
we are doing calculations on the date.
Now to the last thing that we can do
with this date is we can go and test
this date or validate it whether it is a
real date that SQL understands. So we
can put it on the test and at the output
we're going to get true or false or zero
and one. So as you can see here we have
different ways or let's say categories
on how to manipulate our dates in SQL.
Now we're going to go and group up the
different date and time functions under
four categories. The first category and
the most important one we have the part
extraction and here we have around seven
different functions that we can use in
order to do this task. Another category
we have the format and casting. And here
we have three different functions.
Underneath this category we have the
format, convert and cast. And then the
third category we have the calculations
of the dates. We have two functions date
add and date diff. And the last category
the validation. We have here only one
function called is dates. So as you can
see we have a lot of scale functions. We
have 13 date and time functions that
we're going to cover in this tutorial on
how to manipulate the date and time
informations in SQL. And this is how we
can group them into four different
categories. Let's start now with the
biggest category. We have the part
extraction. We're going to cover all
those seven functions in details on how
to extract
parts. All right friends, now we're
going to cover three very easy quick
functions in SQL to extract the parts of
the dates. So they are very simple. The
day function going to return a day from
a date and in the same way the month
going to return the month from a date
and guess what the year going to return
a year from a date. Okay. So now in
order to understand how they work we
have a date like this one 2025 August
20th. Sometimes you are not interested
in the whole date. You would like to get
only a part from this date. So you go
and use the function day in order to
extract the two digit 20. Now in other
scenario you might be interested in the
month information. So you would like to
get those two digits 08. So we can use
the function month in order to extract
the month information in order to get
the August. So 08 and one more situation
where you want to have only the year
information. So you are interested in
the four digits 2025. So you can go and
use the function year in order to
extract it. So in the output if you
apply it you will get 2025. So it's very
simple. This is how those three
functions work. All right. Now let's
check the syntax of those three
functions. It's pretty easy. So we have
it always like this. A keyword called
day. This is the function name. And then
it accept only one parameter. It is the
date. The same things for the others. We
have a function called month and it
accept as well only one parameter the
date and as well for the year the same
thing. So the syntax is very
straightforward. It accept only one
value the date and we have the function
name like the name of the part that we
want to extract. All right. So now let's
try out those functions. I will be
working with the column creation time.
So let's try for example extracting the
year from the creation time using the
year function. So it's going to be very
simple. It's going to be year and then
creation
time like this. And let's call it year.
That's it. Let's go and execute it. Now
as you can see it's very simple. We have
only one year 2025 from the creation
time. So with that as you can see we got
a new column where we have only the year
informations inside it. And this
information come from the creation date.
So we have only 2025. Now let's go and
do the same for the month. So we're
going to have the same thing month
creation time and let's call it month.
So let's execute it. Now as you can see
in the output we got as well the number
of the month. So we have here January,
February and March and those information
as well are extracted from the creation
time and the same thing using the day
function. So let's go and use that. So
creation time and we call it day. So now
as you can see in the output we have the
day part from the creation time. So here
we have 1, 5, 10 and so on and all those
informations come from the creation
time. So as you can see those three
functions are very simple and quick in
order to extract parts from a date or
date
[Music]
time. All right. So what is date part?
Date part going to go and return
specific part of the date as a number.
All right. So now back to our example.
We have learned how to extract the day,
month and year. But of course now in a
day we have more informations that we
could extract. Not only those three we
could extract for example the week right
the quarter so all those informations
are as well stored in this dates we
cannot see it like as a value but inside
the SQL you can extract the week and
quarter but we don't have a function
dedicated for those stuff because they
are not commonly used like the year and
month and day but still we can extract
those information using the date parts
for example we can say date part and we
can specify the part as a week and with
that SQL going to return for this
example 34 and maybe in other situation
you are interested in the quarter right
so you can specify it like this date
part quarter so we are interested in the
part of quarter and in the output you
will get three so this is exactly the
power of the date part you can go and
extract way more parts that is available
in these dates and one more thing to
notice about the date part year and day
all of them are always generating the
output an integer a number. So we have
the for the quarter 3 for the week 34
the day 20 2025 and so on. So all of
those informations are integer. So
integer is the data type of the output
of these functions. Okay. So let's have
a look to the syntax of the data part.
It start with the function name date
parts and it accept two parameters. The
first one is the part that we want to
extract. So we want to define what do we
want. We want the month, the day, the
year and so on. And the second parameter
is the date itself. So let's have an
example. We can say date part and we
would like to extract the month from the
order dates. So the part is the month
and the order date is the date that we
want to extract from. So with that we
are specifying the part as a month. Now
in SQL there is another way on how to
specify the parts. We can go and use
like an abbreviation of the month. So if
you specify instead of month instead of
writing the whole thing you write mm you
will get the same results. So it's like
abbreviation and shortcut in order to
write scripts. But I rarely see that in
the implementations. I always tend to
write it completely like this month
because it's more like standards if you
are switching between different
databases. So as you can see it's very
simple. You have to give SQL two things
which part you want to extract and the
date that you want to extract from.
Okay. So now we're going to go and
extract different parts from the
creation time using the date part. Let's
start for example by extracting the year
again. So let's go and do that. date
parts and then we have to specify which
part we need. So we're going to write
year like this and then the next one
going to be the value. So it's going to
be the creation time. So let's call it
year and let's say date parts. Let's go
and execute it. So now at the output you
can see we got as well again the years
that is extracted from the creation
time. So it's going to be identical to
the year function. So there is no
differences between them. Both of them
are integer and it holds the year
informations. Now we can go and try
different parts. For example, let's copy
the whole thing and let's extract for
example the month. So you can go over
here and change it to month and let's
rename it
execute. So at the output you see we got
as well the months is identical as well
to the function month. And the same
thing for the day. So we are just
changing the
parts and in the output we are getting
the parts. So here we have as well the
days it is identical to the day
function. So so far we don't have
something new from the date part because
we have it already from the other
functions. But now we're going to go and
extract other parts that are not year
month and day. So for example let's go
and get the hours. So we have the date
part and here as a part you say hour and
let's call it here as well hour. Let's
go and execute it. Now you can see in
the output we have a new dedicated
column that shows only the information
from the hour. So we have here 12 23 and
so on. And those informations comes from
the time and the same thing you can
define minutes and so on. But now let's
go and get something interesting like
the quarter. So let's go and duplicate
it and instead of hour let's get
quarter. So this information it's not
displayed in the creation time but SQL
can go and extract it. So let's call it
quarter and let's go and execute it. Now
as you can see in the output we have one
new field called quarter and inside it
everywhere we have a one because all
those dates are in the range of the
quarter one. So as you can see this is
amazing of course for reporting and
analyzes. Let's go and have something
else like the week day. So we are over
here quarter and let's call it week day
and rename as well this to week day. So
let's go and execute it. All right. So
now let's go and get something else like
for example the week. So I just
duplicated over here instead of quarter
let's write week. So I would like to get
the week number. So let's go and execute
it. So now in the output as you can see
we got a dedicated field that show us
the week number from the creation time.
So we can see this dates come from the
week number one. Those two come from
week number two and so on. So that's it.
As you can see guys all those
informations that you are getting from
the date part are numbers. And now we
can extract way more informations than
only the year, month and day. And even
if those informations are not displayed
directly in the field itself like the
quarter, weeks and so
[Music]
on. All right. So now we have very
similar function to the date part. We
have the date name. So the only
difference here is that it returns the
name of the date parts. All right. So
now back to our example. We have learned
we can extract different types of parts
from one date. But we learned as well
that all of them are numbers. How about
we would like to extract the name of the
month. So instead of eight, I would like
to get the name of the month like
August. Or instead of the 20, I would
like to get the day name like here in
this example, it going to be Wednesday.
So in order to get the name of the
parts, we have to use the function date
name. So for example, if you use the
function date name using the part month,
you will not get eight in the output.
You will get the full name of the month
August. So as you can see we are getting
a string a full name and as well the
same thing if you use date name for the
week day you will not get 20 like the
day function you will get the name of
the day Wednesday and as well here the
output is string so as you can see it's
very simple we are using the date name
in order to get the name of the parts
and the data type of the output here is
a string it is not an integer so as you
can see here we have different types of
functions that all of them are doing the
same job we are extracting ing parts
from one date. Okay. So now by checking
the data name syntax, it's going to be
identical to the date part. So we are
just switching the function name. It
needs from you to define the part and as
well the dates. The only difference here
is that we are getting different data
type at the output. So here we are
getting a string instead of integer. All
right. So now let's check the date name.
It is very similar to the date part. So
we're going to have it like this. We're
going to work as well with the creation
time. So we're going to say date name
and then after that we have to define
the parts. So let's go for example with
the month and our field is as usual the
creation time and let's call it month
date
name like this. So that's it. Let's go
and execute it. Now if you go to the
output over here you can see we have the
month but this time we don't have
numbers. We have the full name of the
month. So we have January, February,
March instead of having 1 2 3. So this
is the big difference between the date
name and date part. Date part you get
numbers. Date name you get the name of
the part. So let's do the same thing for
the day. We would like to get the name
of the day. So I'm just duplicating it.
But now in order to get the full name of
the day, we cannot go with the day.
We're going to go with the week day as a
part. So that's it. I will call it week
day. So let's execute it. Now as you can
see in the output, we have here a new
column called week day. And inside it we
have the name of the day instead of a
number. So here we have Wednesday,
Sunday, Friday and so on. So the full
name of the day go of course with the
day. Let's go and try that
out. So this is the day of the month and
of course the day of the month has no
name and SQL of course going to return
the numbers again. So you can see 1 5 10
20 and so on. But still there is a
difference between the day from the day
name and the day from the date parts. In
the date parts we are getting integers.
So if you store this information in a
new table it's going to be stored as an
integer. But in the date that you are
getting from the date name it is a
number but still it can be stored as a
string value. So the data type of those
numbers is a string and the data types
of the day from the date part is an
integer. And the same thing can happen
if you extract for example a year. So
you don't have like a full text of the
year. So let me just do it like this. So
if we say a year, you will not get the
name of the year. You're still getting
the numbers, the digits, but the data
type here is a string. So that's it.
This is the difference between the date
name and the date parts. For the month
and weekday, you will get the full name.
For the other stuff, you will get
numbers but with the string data type.
So the most important thing about the
date name is to present easy to read and
human readable informations to the
users. So imagine you are building a
report called sales by month and then
you show to the user the muscles as
numbers 1 2 3 until 12. This is of
course okay but it is way more nicer if
you present those informations as a full
text. So you go with the date name in
order to show instead of one you show
January, February, March and the full
name of the month. And this going to
look way nicer in reporting for the
users. So this is the core use case of
the date
name. So what is date trunk? Date trunk
going to go and truncate the date to a
specific part. So let's understand what
this means. Okay. Now let's check the
syntax of the date trunk. It's going to
be exactly the same like date part and
date name. So you have to define the
part and the date that you want to
extract apart from it. So the only thing
that is different here we are giving
different function name. So as you can
see all those three functions like
having the same structure you have to
provide which part you want to extract
like a month, day, week, hour, minutes
and so on and the date or date and time
that you want to extract a part from it
and of course with the date trunk we are
getting at the output date or date time.
Okay. So now let's understand exactly
how the date trunk works. We have the
following date time and as we learned we
have like a hierarchy where we start
with the highest from the year then we
move to the month, day, hours, minutes
and seconds and by looking to this
information it is very precise. We know
exact second for this information right?
So the level of details here is very
high. We know the seconds of this event.
So now the date going to allow us to
change this level of details of this
information by specifying the level of
details. Let's take for example if we
say the date trunk minutes. So we are
saying we are interested only at the
minutes level. We are not interesting
with the seconds. So what can happen?
Everything between the year and the
minutes going to be kept. That means all
those information will not be changed
but only the seconds going to be
reseted. We are not interested anymore
with the seconds. This is very detailed
for us. So it's going to go and reset
the seconds to 0 0. So we are saying the
minimum level is the minutes and we are
not interested anything like before it
the seconds let's say now we say you
know what the minutes is very detailed I
would like to be at the hours level so
we specify for the date rank hour so
here things changed we're going to keep
the informations now between the year
and the hours and anything after that
going to be reseted so now minutes and
seconds going to be in the range of the
resets and SQL going to go and reset the
55 to 0 0 so now the level of details is
little bit lower now we know only the
informations until the hours and we are
not interested about the minutes and the
seconds and I think you already get it
if you say date trunk day what's going
to happen it's going to keep everything
between year and day and the whole time
going to be resets so the hours and
seconds all those information is going
to reset to 0 0 so now by looking to
this we don't know anything about the
time we know only informations about the
dates and now we can go one more step
and we say you know what I'm not
interested about the days I'm doing
analyszis on the month level so what is
here kept is only two informations year
and month and everything below that the
day and the time going to be reseted but
this time SQL will not reset the date to
0 0 because there is no date called 0 0
it start always with the first date so
it's going to reset to 01 so the dates
parts and the dates going to reset to 01
one and the dates parts in the time
going to reset to 0 0. So now we are at
the level of the month. Now you can go
to the last step and you say you know
what I'm interested only on the years
and I'm doing only analyzes at this
level at the highest level. So you can
go and say date trunk year and now
what's going to happen going to keep
only the year and everything below that
going to be reseted. So between month
and the seconds everything going to
resets. So here is scale going to reset
as well the August 2011. So the only
value that is kept is the year and
everything else is reseted. So this is
the 1st of January and the time is
completely reseted. So now we are at the
lowest level of details. We know only
information about the year and we don't
care about any other parts. So as you
can see the date trunk here is not
really extracting a part here. Date
trunk is like resetting stuff. So we are
navigating through the hierarchy of the
date and time and we are controlling at
which level we are doing the analyszis.
So as you can see at the end it's not
very complicated once you understand how
it works and it is very useful in
analyzis. So this is how the date trunk
works in SQL. Okay, let's have a few
examples about the date rank together
with the creation time. So as you can
see the creation time the level of it is
the seconds. So we have seconds
information with the creation time. Now
I would like to move it to the minutes.
So let's go and do this date trunk and
we're going to say let's tr it at the
minutes level for the creation time. So
let's call it minute date trunk. So
let's go and execute it. Now if you go
and check the output over here and
compare it to the creation time, you can
see here we have zeros at the seconds.
So as you can see we have the seconds
completely resetted compared to the
creation time. Now let's say that I'm
not interested in the time information
inside the creation time. I would like
only to get the date. So in order to do
that, we can use the date trunk where we
reset to the level of the day. So let's
go and duplicate it. I'm going to put it
over here and instead of minutes, let's
say we have a day and let's go and check
the output. Now if you go and check the
result over here you can see all the
time informations are reseted to zeros
and we have here only information about
the date. So we have year month and day
and everything else is reset it to zero.
Now of course we can go to the maximum
where we say I just need the year. So I
don't need anything else. So let's try
that out. We're going to take date trunk
and say year and let's call it year. So
let's go and execute it. Now if you
check the output over here you can see
that everything is reseted beside the
year. So we have only the year
information but everything else is
reseted to the first of January and the
time is as well is reseted. So as you
can see the output of the date trunk is
always as a date time and it help us as
well to navigate through the hierarchy
of the day time and we can truncate at
the level that we want. All right. So
now we're going to check why data trunk
is amazing function for data analyszis.
So let's have this example. We are
saying select
creation time and we want to count the
number of orders based on the creation
time from our table sales orders and
we're going to use the group by in order
to group the data by the creation time.
So let's go and execute it. Now as you
can see we're going to get one
everywhere because the level of details
the granularity or the creation time is
very high and that's because here we
have the seconds and since our data is
small we will not get like two orders at
the same seconds. Now in data analytics
you would like quickly to aggregate the
data at different granularity like for
example at the month level. So you can
do that very quickly using the date
trunk and you say you know what let's
say at the month and let's call it
creation and we're going to have the
same thing for the group pie. So let's
go and execute it. So now as you can see
at the output we have only three rows we
don't have like 10 rows and that's
because we have three months. So that
means we just rolled up to the month
level instead of the seconds. And we can
see now in the month of January we have
four orders, February as well four and
March we have only two. So now we are
talking about different level of details
in the output and granularity. And now
you might say let's go and aggregate the
data at different level at the year
level. So you can just change over here
the year and execute it. And with that
now we are at the highest level of
aggregations. We are at the year level
and since in our data we have only 2025.
So we will get the total number of
orders inside the table and that is 10.
And this is really amazing in data
analytics. You can go and quickly change
the granularity and the level of
aggregation or details by simply
defining the level inside the dates. So
this is why the date rank is amazing. It
allow us to do analyszis and
aggregations by zooming in and zooming
out. Okay. So now we're going to talk
about the last function in the part
extraction category. We have the end of
the month. As the name says, it's going
to go and return the last day of a
month. So let's see how end of month
works. This is very simple. So let's
take our date 20th August 2025. If you
go now and apply this function to it,
what's going to happen? It's going to go
and change only the day information. So
instead of 20, it's going to go to the
last day of the month. So it's going to
go and change the 20 to 31. The last day
of the month, August in 2025. Let's take
another example is the 1st of February
2025. If you apply the end of the month,
it's going to go and change the day from
the 1st to 28. The last day of month
February. So as you can see, it's very
simple. Let's take another example where
it is already the last day of the month.
So we have 31 of March. If you apply the
end of the month here, what can happen?
Nothing going to happen. You're going to
get in return the same value. So this is
how it works. And as you can see always
the output of the end of the month going
to be as well a date. So this is how end
of month work. It is very simple. All
right. Now quickly about the syntax of
the end of the month. It's going to have
the exact same syntax like the day,
month, year. It accepts only one
parameter. It is the date. So we have to
pass here a date in order to find out
the end of the month. So let's go and
find the end of the month of our
creation time. So end of the month like
this. And let's have our creation time.
So let's see the end of month. Let's go
and execute it. And now in the output
you can see we have a new column a date
column. And inside it we have values
about the end of the month. So for
example here we have January, January,
January and so on. So you will see
always here the end of January and the
same thing for February and March. So
that's it. This is really nice function
in case you need the end of the month of
each date. Maybe you're creating a
report or analyzes where you need this
information. And now you might ask me
how about to get the first day of the
month. Is there like any function for
it? Well, no. But there is a trick in
order to get the first day of the month
using another function that we just
learned. Think about it. How to get the
days as one everywhere. So we have to
get here the 1st of January, the 1st of
February, and the 1st of March. So how
we can do that? Well, using the date
trunk. So let me show you how we're
going to do this. So date
trunk and we're going to reset at the
level of month. So we don't need the
days it going to reset to the first. So
our field is creation time and this
going to be the start of month. So let's
go and execute it. So now as you can see
in the output we have the start of month
and you can see we have everywhere here
a one since we reset it at the level of
month and this going to give us the
first day of the month. And now you
might say you know what here we have a
lot of zeros how to get it exactly like
the end of the month and that's because
the date rank give us date and time
always. So that means we have to change
the data type and that we're going to
learn later using the cast function but
we can go and do it right now. So we can
say cast and we want to change the whole
thing to date. And now that we change
the data type from date time to date and
in the output as you can see we have
only the date information. So now it's
really amazing that you got two dates.
The first one is the start of the month
and the second is the end of the month.
And those information might be helpful
if you are generating reporting and you
need the start and the end of the
[Music]
month. So now we come to the part where
we ask the question why do we need those
parts? Why do we need to extract the
date parts from a date? So let's have
the following use cases. The first use
case of extracting the part is doing
data aggregations and reporting.
Sometimes we are building like reports
based on our data and sometimes we have
to aggregate our data by a specific time
unit like for example we are building a
reports in order to show the sales by
year. So we have different years and we
are aggregating the data based on the
year or you want to drill down to more
details where you want to aggregate the
data by the quarter. So in this report
we are showing the sales by quarter Q1 2
3 4 or you decide to go in more details
where you show a report says sales by
month and then you start aggregating
your data by the month. So you have
January, February, March and so on. So
as you can see we can use those
different parts in order to aggregate
the data based on it and these different
parts can offer us different analyzes
with different details. So now we have
the following task and it says how many
orders were placed each year. So that
means we have to group up our data by
the year and we have to count the number
of orders. Let's go and solve it. So
let's go with the select. And now what
do we need? We need the order date. This
going to indicate when the order is
placed. So and we have to go and count
the star. So this going to be number of
orders. and from our table sales orders
and we have to group up by the order
dates. So that's it. Let's go a and
execute it. So now in the output we are
getting the number of orders but by the
order date. So we are still not there.
We have to have it as a year. So we
don't need the whole date information.
We need only the year information. So
that means we have to go and extract the
part year. In order to do that we can do
it like this. So we can go with the year
and we have it as well in the group I.
So that's it. Let's go and execute it.
And with that as you can see we got the
number of orders for each year. And
since in our data we have only 2025 we
will get only one row. So with that the
task is solved. We are now aggregating
the data on the level of the year. Now
let's have another task which is the
same but only different parts. How many
orders were placed each month. So we
have to go and change it to a month.
It's very simple. We're going to use the
function month and as well in the group
by. So let's go and execute it. And now
as you can see in the output we don't
have one row. Now we have three rows.
And that's because we have three months
inside our data. And for each month we
will get the total number of orders. So
for the January we have four, February
we have four and March we have two
orders. Now you might say you know what
I don't want the months as a numbers. I
would like to have the full name of the
month. So in order to do that we're
going to go and use the function date
name. So let's go and use date name and
then we have to specify the date part.
It's going to be the month and the value
going to be the order date and we have
to have the same thing as well in the
group I. So let's go and execute it. Now
you can see in the output we are getting
the full name of the month which is
easier to read. So this is one of the
use cases why we need to extract parts
from a date in order to aggregate the
data on a specific level.
So now let's have the following task and
it says show all orders that were placed
during the month of February. So that
means we don't need all the orders. We
need only a subset of the orders based
on the order dates. Now let's go and
check the data. So select star first
from sales orders and let's go and
execute it. So now with that we have our
10 orders. Now if you check the order
date over here you can see that we have
orders in January, February and March.
Now we are interested only on the orders
that were placed in February. So only
these subsets. So that means we have now
to filter the data based on the month
information. So what we're going to do,
we're going to have a wear clause. And
now we don't need the whole order date.
We need only the part month. So we're
going to go with the month and order
date and this going to be equal to two.
Since the output going to be in number.
So let's go and execute it. Now as you
can see SQL did filter the data and in
the output we have only the orders were
placed in the month of February. So this
is as well very common use case. Why do
we need the parts? We use it in order to
filter the data based on specific part
of the dates. So as you can see it's
very quick and easy. And here my
recommendation is that if you are
filtering the data always use the
numbers. So always use a date function
that gives you a number because it's
always faster to search for integers
instead of searching for a character or
for string. So don't use the date name
function in order to search or filter
for the data. It's better to use the
date part or month, year and day. Since
you can work with numbers and numbers
are always faster to retrieve data and
to filter your
informations. Okay. So now we have a lot
of functions and I would like now to do
a quick recap about the data type of
their results. So as we learned we have
functions like day, month, year, date
bar and the output of all those
functions going to be integer. It's
going to be a number. Now we have
another function the date time. If you
use it the output of this function going
to be a string because here we are
extracting the name of the date part.
And if you go and use the date trunk you
will get in the output always date time
two. So you are getting both the date
and time. And the last function that we
learned end of month if you use it in
the results you will get the data type
date. So this is really important to
understand the data type of the output
so that you don't get any unexpected
results. All right. So now you might say
you know what those are a lot of
functions and like I'm saying they are
doing the same stuff. We are extracting
the parts of the dates. So now you might
ask me how do you decide on when to use
which function? This is how I usually do
it. First I ask myself which part I want
to extract. If I want to extract a date
or a month then I ask the question do I
need it as an integer as a number? If
it's yes then I go and use the day
function or the month function because
they are quick and I will get exactly
what I need. But now if I need the full
name of the month or the day then I go
with the function date name. Now moving
back if I'm interested on the part year.
So here we don't have a year name or
something. I'm going to go immediately
with the function year. But now let's
say that I don't need the day, month or
year. I'm interested in other parts like
the week, the quarter and so on. Only
for this scenario, I go with the
function date part. So this is my
decision process. This is how I decide
when to use which SQL function in order
to extract the parts of the
dates. All right. All right. So now I
have prepared for you here a list of all
parts that we can use inside those three
functions date part date name and date
trunk. And you can see in this table the
different outputs using those different
three functions. So for example if you
go and use the month with the date part
you will get eight but for the date name
you will get August and for the date
trunk you will get truncated date time
at the level of the month where you
reset the days and times. So this is a
full list of all examples you can go and
check it. And one more thing that I have
prepared for you in order to practice
with all those different parts. I have
made one big query with all different
parts. So if you go and download the
queries of this chapter, you will find
the following files and let's go now and
open all date parts. So we're going to
go inside it and here we have a long
query. So what we're going to do, we're
going to select everything and copy it
and let's go back to our scale and paste
it. So let me just zoom out and then
let's go and execute the whole thing. So
now in my code I have just done a union
for each possible part. For example for
the year we have date part date name and
date trunk and I'm using currently the
get date. So we are manipulating this
one and then the output can be presented
over here. So you can see it like this.
So if you use the part here for the date
name you will get 2024. The same thing
for the date name and this is for the
date rank. And with that you have all
possible parts that you can use in SQL
in one query. So with that you can learn
what are the outputs for different
parts. All right. So with that we have
learned all those functions on how to
extract the parts of dates. All right.
Moving to the second category. We're
going to learn how to do formatting and
casting for the date informations in SQL
using three functions.
So now before we deep dive to the
formatting and casting I would like you
to understand what is date format. So
back to our example we have here the
date and time informations and we
understood there is components year
month day and so on. Now if you check
the date time there is combination of
numbers and characters. For example the
2025 is a number but between the month
and the year there is like a minus
between them and this is a character. So
now this is a very specific format and
in SQL we can have a code for this
format. So for example let's start with
the year we have here four digits and we
can represent it with 4 Y. So Y Y and we
call those characters as format
specifiers. So this is how we represent
the year. Then between the year and the
month there is like this small minus and
then the month is two digits and we're
going to represent it with two big M. So
m M then between the month and the day
there is a minus. So we have as well
minus and then the day going to
represented with two digits d and then
we have like a space between the date
and time and then we start with the
date. So it start with the hour big h
and big h because here we have the
system of 24 and then we have double
points small m small m. So as you can
see here the formats are case sensitive.
So there is a big difference between
small m and a big m. So a small m
indicates for a minute and big m
indicates for a month. So as you can see
here the case format is case sensitive.
So two small m means minutes but two
capital m means month. Then double point
and small 2s. So now the whole code is
called the date format. So this is the
date format representation of this
value. Now in the world there are
different representations on how to
represent a date. So for example in SQL
we have the international standard
ISO6801 and the date format is like we
have learned first it start with the
year. So four digit for the years minus
two digit for the month minus two digit
for the day. So year month day but in
the USA we have different standards. So
first it start with the month. So we
have mm and then after that it is
followed with the day. So we have then
the day and after that at the end we
have the year. So this is the sentence
format that is used in USA and in Europe
we have different representations of the
day. So it start first with the small.
So it starts with the day then the month
and then the year. So this is exactly
the opposite of the international
standards. So as you can see we don't
have one standard. We have different
ways on how we represent dates. But in
SQL the SQL server is following the
format of the international standards.
So SQL server start always with the year
then month then day. So all dates that
are used in our SQL database can be
following this
format. Okay. So after we understood
what is date format, now let's talk
about formatting and casting. So what is
formatting? Is changing the format of
value from one to another. So we are
changing how the data looks like. So for
example, we have our date. So it's
following the international standards
start with year, month, then day. Now we
can go and change the format using the
function format where we can go and
define a different date format like it
start with the month and then we have
like slash instead of minus and then the
day/ year. So in the outer we're going
to get it like this and even the years
is only two digits not four. So here we
are providing for SQL the format that we
would like to see the data with or you
can go with other format where you have
three big M and then four digits for the
year and between them is just a space.
So in the output you will get
abbreviation of the month name and then
space and the year. So this is one way
on how to format data. But in the scale
there is another function that help us
to format data and that is convert. So
here we provide not the format itself we
provide style number. So for example the
style number six. So it can show it like
this day space and after that we have
the abbreviation name of the month and
then two digits of the year. Or if you
use another style the 112 then you will
get the year, month, day without any
separation between them. And of course
not only the date and time we can style
we can style as well numbers and here we
can use the function format in order to
change the format of the number. So here
if you're using the format of numeric
values then the values will be separated
with comma or if you use c for the
currency then you will get the dollar
sign or if you go and use p then you
will get the percentage and at the end
you have the percentage character. So as
you can see we can as well change the
format of the numbers but only the
dates. So this is what we mean by
formatting we are just changing how the
value looks like. Now in the other hand
the casting the casting can go and
change the data type from one to
another. So for example if we have the
value 1 2 3 as a string we can go and
convert it from the data type string to
an integer. So in the output we will get
as well 1 2 3 but as a number or we can
go and change the data type from dates
to a string. So in the output it is not
anymore dates it is a string value or
the way around we can change the data
type from a string to a date. So as you
can see we can change the data type from
one to another and we can use that using
two functions. The first one is and the
most famous one is cast function or in
SQL server we can use as well the
convert function in order to change the
data type. So this is what we mean with
casting changing the data type from one
to
another. All right. So let's start with
the first function the format. So what
is format? As the name suggest it
formats a date or time value. So it's
like we are changing how the date and
time looks. Okay. So let's check the
syntax of the format and here it accepts
two parameters and the third one is
optional. So the first one we have to
provide a value. It could be a date or a
number. And the second one we have to
provide the format. So here we are
specifying the new look the new format
for this value. Now the third one it is
optional one. It is the culture. Culture
means show me the value whether it's
date, time or number. Show me this value
in the style of a specific country or
region. So each country each region has
different format. So here we can go and
change it to specific region format. But
as I said it is optional. Let's have an
example. So here we are saying go and
format the order dates using the
following format. So dd day then slash
then we have the month then slash then
the year. So going to go and format this
with this new format. And as you can see
here we didn't specify any culture since
it's optional. Let's see another option
where we can say you know what I would
like to have the order date formatted
with this format but we would like to go
and add the style of Japan. So we are
specifying here the code or the style of
Japan. And of course we can go and use
the format not only for the date but as
well for formatting the numbers. So here
we are specifying the value. The format
is D. And as well we have activated the
culture option. We are using the style
of France. So this is the syntax of the
format. Using this option is not really
common. So I rarely see this format or
someone using it. So the first example
is the most used one in the projects
where we have the culture as default or
we are not using the culture at all. And
of course if you don't specify anything
is going to go and use the default
culture which is enus. So this is all
about the syntax of the format. All
right. So now let's have a few examples
using the format. So we're going to go
and format the creation time. So we're
going to do it like this. Format. And
what we are formatting? We are
formatting the creation time and now you
can go and define any specifier you
want. For example, let's say DD like
this. So let's go and check the outputs.
So execute it. Now if you are using DD,
you will get the day information. So we
can see if you're using this specifier,
we are getting two digits about the day.
So and as well we are getting the
leading zero. So we are getting the 01
05 and all those informations are the
day information. Now let's go and try
something else. adding one more D. So
let's have it 3D and here as well. So
let's go execute it. So now if you check
the output, we are getting now the name
of the day. It is not full. So we are
getting like a short name of the day or
abbreviated one. So this is sometime
nice if you are creating like a calendar
or something. Let's go and add one more
D. So we're going to have 4 D. And let's
go and check the result for this one.
Now in the output we are getting the
full name of the day. So it's really
nice. Now we are getting full
flexibility on how to format our day.
Okay. So now let's keep playing. Let's
get something else. I'm just going to go
and duplicate everything and I will go
with the month now. So this is 2 M, 3 M
and 4 M. Let me do it like this. So
let's go and execute it. Now as you can
see we are getting the same stuff but
for the month. So mm we will get the two
digits and 3m we will get the
abbreviated name of the month and for m
we will get the full name of the month.
So it's like we are extracting the date
part from the format but of course we
don't use it like this. We will go and
write the whole format that we need for
a date. So for example let's go and
change this format to the USA format. So
in order to do it so we're going to go
over here. So let's say format again the
creation time. And now we're going to
write the format of USA. So it's going
to be mm. Then after that then after the
month we're going to have like minus
then day and then after that we're going
to get the year. So for time year and
that's it. Let's call it USA format. So
let's go and excuse it. And now you can
see in the outut we got a new column
where we see now the date information
but as a USA standards. So it start with
the month then the day and then
afterward we got the year. And of course
we can do the same thing in order to
generate the standard format of Europe.
So what we're going to do I'll just
duplicate it. And now the format of that
going to start with the day then the
month and then the year. So now if you
check the output you can see it start
with day minus then we have the month
then minus the year. So as you can see
we are changing the format of the date
from creation time to something new. All
right. So now we have the following task
and it says show creation time using the
following format. Now we have a very
weird format. So it start with the word
day. Then after that we have the
abbreviation of the day and then
abbreviation of the month. This is the
quarter informations. Then the year and
after that we have the time and we're
going to say whether it's PM or A.M. So
it's little bit weird format that you
don't see it everywhere but still we
want to practice on how to construct
such custom format. So let's do it step
by step. I'm going to go over here and a
new line. So the first one is like day.
So we don't have any format for that.
It's just like characters. So this one
going to be static for all the format.
So what we going to do? We're going to
say with a string this is the day. So
let's go and execute it. So with that we
got a static value. Everywhere we have
the word day. So that's it. And after
that we have a space. So I'm going to go
and include it after the day in the
string. So we have a day then space and
after that we need the abbreviation of
the day name. So what we're going to do
we're going to go first with the plus
operator in order to concatenate the
strings. So we need the format function
for the creation time. And what do we
need? We need the short name. So it's
going to be three times the d. Let's go
and execute it. Let me just say here
custom formats. So now as you can see in
the output we have here the day. Then
afterward we have space and then the
abbreviation of the name of the day. So
it looks so far good. Now after that
what do we need? We need space and then
the abbreviation of the month. So we can
go and add all those stuff together with
the format here. So we don't have to
create two formats. So space and the
abbreviation of the month is 3 M. So
let's go and test it. Great. So now as
you can see we got the abbreviation of
the month as well side by side. So we so
far we have covered this part. Now we
have to move to the second part. So we
still need a space and then Q1. Well the
Q going to be static. So we cannot go
and extend this format. We have to start
a new one. So what I'm going to do I'm
just going to add a plus here and a new
line. So what do we need? We need first
a space between the month and the
quarter. So let's go and add space and
we need the Q as a static value like
this. Let me just move it like this. And
now after that we need this one like
this right so now we need the quarter
informations and we don't have format
for that that's why we have to go and
use the part extraction functions and
the one that we're going to use since we
are using string I will go with the date
name so quarter and we are extracting
from the creation time so let's go and
test it so now in the output you can see
we have everywhere a Q1 and that's
because all of those dates are in Q1 all
right so now we are so far halfway in
our format Not. So now next what do we
need? We need like a space and then the
year information and then the time
information. So now in order to go and
get space we're going to do it very
simply concatenate and we're going to
have space. Now let's go to a new line
and in order to get the year I will go
with the format as well. So format and
what do we have? We're going to have the
creation time
again. So how we going to format it now?
What do we need? We need the year. So
it's going to be four times the y and
after that we have like space and then
the time information. We still can't do
that inside the format, right? So we're
going to have space here. And then next
what do we have? We have the hours. So
it's going to be h the small h because
here we are talking about the pm and am.
It's not the 24hour system. And then
after that what do we have? The points
double points. Then the minutes going to
be small 2 m. And then after that the
seconds. So far this is exactly this
part over here. And now what is missing
a space and the PM the designator. So in
order to do that we're going to have a
space as well and then small 2 * tt. All
right. So we are almost there. Let's go
and execute it. Now you can see it is
working. So we have the year then space
the hours minutes and space and then we
have the designator. So this is PM and
this is A.M. which is correct. So that's
it. We are done. This is how you can
create those crazy formats in SQL using
the help of format or maybe date name or
maybe some static values like we just
added here. So I think it's really fun
formatting the dates in
SQL. Now one use case for the format
that I frequently use in my project is
using it to format the date before doing
aggregations. So it's like part
extraction but here we have more
customizations on how we represent the
date at the reports. So we can show a
report like sales by month where we
display for example the date as
abbreviation name of the month Jan and
as well two digits for the year 25. So
once we change the format like this and
then do data aggregations we will have a
nice report about the sales by month. So
let's have a quick aggregations using
the format. So, we're going to go and
say select and now the order date and
count the number of
orders from our table sales orders and
then group by. But now before we start
using the order date, we have to go and
format it. And then if you take the
order date, let's go and execute it. So
as you can see the level of details is
very high and we have here 10 rows and
for each day we have like one order. Now
we learned we can go and use the date
part in order to extract one part and
then aggregate on it. So now instead of
that we're going to go and use the
format function. So let's go and change
the format and it is the order dates.
And our format going to be like this. So
three big M and then two digits for the
year. That's it. And let's call it order
dates. And we need this as well for the
order date over here for the group I and
here a comma. So that's it. Let's go and
execute it. So in the output as you can
see over here we have three months and
here we having the aggregation the
number of orders for each month. So now
it's like the date part but now we are
customizing the format as we want. So we
can use the format in order to change
the granularity of the date in order to
do that
aggregations. Now I'm going to show you
a real use case for the formatting in
real projects. Now our data could be
stored in different technologies like
the data could be stored in CSV file or
we can get our data using an API call or
in very common scenario our data could
be stored in database. So now what we
usually do we go and extract the data
from these different sources into one
central storage. It could happen that
you are getting different formats for
the dates and of course this is a
problem for analytics. You cannot
present different formats for the dates.
What we're going to do we're going to go
and clean up the formats into one
standard format. So that means we have
to format the incoming data to new
formats and once we have one standard
format we can use it in analytics and
reports. So this is very common use case
in data preparation and in data cleanup
by formatting different formats into one
standard
format. Now in SQL we have many
different date and time specifiers and I
said they are case sensitive and each
one of them has a different meaning. So
I prepared for you as well all possible
specifiers that we can use with the
formats. Not only that, if you go back
to the queries that you can find in this
chapter, you can find here date format.
So all date formats. If you go inside
it, you can go and copy the whole query
and then go back to SQL then execute it.
You can find here a live example because
I'm manipulating now the get date. So
you can find here a list of all possible
date specifiers that you can use with
the formats. So I would say go and
practice with those different date
formats in order to understand what is
possible in SQL. So as we learned not
only we can change the format of the
date, we can change as well the format
of the number using the function formats
and those are the different possibility
that you can use as a specifier for this
format in order to change the format of
the numbers and as well I have prepared
all those different specifiers in one
big query. So if you go inside it and
copy it and then put it in SQL and
execute it, you will find here all
different possibilities that we have as
a specifier to change the format of the
numbers. All right. So what is convert?
It's very simple. It's going to go and
change the value to a different type and
as well at the same time it helps
formatting the value. Okay. So let's
check the syntax of the convert and it
looks like this. It start with the
function converts and it accept two
parameters the data type first since we
can use this function in order to cast
the data types. So you can use string
integer dates and so on and then we have
to specify the value. So which value
should be casted. And the last parameter
it is optional one where you define the
style the format of the value. Let's
have this very simple example. We are
saying convert to the data type integer
int and the value that should be
converted is 1 2 3 as a string. So it's
going to convert it to integer. We are
saying convert to a vchart and the value
that should be converted is the order
date. So the order date should be a
date. So we're going to convert it from
date to v charts using the format or the
style of 34. So here we are specifying a
style a format for this value. And of
course it is optional and if you are not
using anything the default value that's
going to be used is zero. So this is the
syntax of the convert in SQL. All right.
So now we're going to have few examples
on how to work with the convert. So
let's go and convert for example string
to integer. So we're going to say for
example convert. So what is the target
data type? It's going to be the integer
and the value. It's going to be like for
example 1 2 3. So and let's call it like
this string to integer and the function
is convert. So now in the column name as
you can see I'm using here brackets and
that's because I'm using like empty
spaces and so on and with that I will
get more freedom on how to name things.
So this is just the name. So this is no
function or something. Let's go and
excuse it. Now as you can see it's going
to work. So we are converting from a
string value to an integer and the
output this 1 2 3 here is not string.
This is the data type of integer. All
right. So now let's have another example
where we want to convert from string to
date. So the target going to be the date
and the value let's have this value as
usual and we're going to go and call
it string to date convert. Okay. So
let's go and execute it. Now in the
output we will get this information this
string as a date. And with that we have
converted the data type from string to
dates. Now let's have another example
where we want to convert the date time
to a date. As you remember the creation
time is a date time and we would like to
have it as only date. So let's go and
convert and we would like it to be as
well date but this time it's going to be
a column called creation time and let's
give it the name. So we are converting
date time to dates. But of course here
we have to go and select. So from sales
orders that's it. Let's go and execute
it. Now, as you can see in the output,
we got only date. I'm going to go and
select the creation time in the query as
well. So now, as you can see, the
creation time was before a date time.
So, we have the time information as
well. But if you go and cast it using
the convert and make it only date. So,
SQL going to go and convert it to date
and you're going to lose all the
informations about the time. So, so far
what we are doing here is just casting.
So, we are changing the data type from
one to another. But in the convert, we
can do both. We can do casting and
formatting. So let's see how we can do
that. I will just get rid of those
information at the start. So creation
time. And now we're going to go and
convert the date time of the creation
time to a varchar to a string. And as
well to give it the format of the USA
standard format. So let's see how we can
do that. We're going to start with
convert. We are changing now to var. So
this is the new data type and the value
is the creation time. And now if I don't
give it a style, it's going to stay with
the standard format, but we would like
to have the USA standards. So in order
to do that, we're going to go and add
the style of the format. So it's going
to be 32. So that's it. Let's have a
name like this. So
USA standard and we are using the style
of 32. Let's go with that. This is just
a name again. So it's not a function.
Let's go ahead and execute it. And now
in the output we got a new field and the
data type of this field is a varchar. So
it's not a date or date time. And as you
can see the date now is formatted using
this style the 32 the US standard
format. So it start with a month then a
day and then a year. So now let's go and
do the same thing in order to get the
standard format in Europe. So I will
just go and copy the whole thing. I will
just change the style. So instead of 32
we're going to go with the 34. And I
will just change the name as well. So,
so we are just changing the style. Let's
go ahead and execute it. Now, as you can
see, we got the same thing. We have as
well a v jar and the format now is
different. So, we have here the day,
then the month, and then the year. So,
this is how you work with the convert
function. You can use it in order to do
only casting or not only that, you can
do casting and as well formatting. So,
you have both things in one function.
And now if you're talking about which
styles are available, we have many
styles that you can use inside the
convert. So I have prepared for you a
list of all styles that you can use with
the convert. So we have styles only for
the dates and another styles only for
the time and styles for only date time.
Now in the download folders you can find
here one file called all culture
formats. And here you can find one query
that I have prepared where you can find
inside it the different cultures and the
examples. So let's go and copy it and
let's go back to scale paste it and
let's see the results. So now if you
check the output we got the first column
is the cultures that is used. So we have
a lot of cultures like around 17s and
you can see how the numbers are
formatted or the date is formatted based
on this culture. So it's really fun. You
can check here for example how the
format in Japan or Korea or France and
the German one. If you scroll down, you
can find the Arabic, the Russian and so
on. So you can see the format of each
dates is changing based on the culture.
So I would say have fun. Go and try
those different cultures formats in
order to format your numbers or
dates. So what is the cast function? It
going to go and convert a value to a
different data type. So it turns one
data type to another. All right. So now
let's check the syntax of the cast. I
really like this one. It is not typical
like format or syntax in SQL. So it says
the cast is the function and then inside
it we need two things but it's not
separated like with the comma as we
learned before with all other functions
but this time is separated with the
keyword as. So it's like the natural
English you are saying cast the value as
a data type. So you are casting the
value to a new data type. So let's have
this very simple example we have here
cast the value 1 2 3 as integer. So
previously it is string and it going to
be converted to integer. So as you can
see it's very simple. Now in this
example we are saying cast this value
this string value as a dates. So
converted from string to dates. So as
you can see with the cast we don't have
here any option of formatting or styling
the values. So it's only dedicated for
casting the value from one data type to
another one. So this is the syntax of
the cast. It is very straightforward and
really nice function. Okay. So now let's
have a few examples about the cast. So
let's go and convert a value from a
string to integer. So it's very simple.
We're going to say cast. So now we need
the value. So let's go with the 1 2 3.
So we have here a string. And then we're
going to say as and then we have to
define the data type. So the data type
going to be integer. So that's it. So
let's give it the name like this string
to integer. Let's go and execute it. Now
as you can see we got the value but with
the data type integer. From string to
integer. Now let's do the way around. We
cast from integer to string. So we're
going to say cast 1 2 3 as var jar and
we're going to give it a
name int to string. So let's go and
execute it. Now in the output we have 1
2 3 but this time it has the data type
varchar. Now let's go and work with the
date. So we're going to go and convert a
value a string value to a date. So our
value going to be the usual one and we
want it from string to date. So we're
going to have the data type as date. So
let's give it a name string to date.
Let's go and execute it. Now we're going
to have this value with the data type
date. So that's it. Now let's say that I
would like to have this value but as
date time. So I will just copy the whole
thing and go to a new line and say date
time two. So the name of this going to
be string to date time. Let's go and
execute it. Now in the output as you can
see we are getting not only the date but
as well we are getting the time
information. But now since we didn't
provide SQL with any time information
SQL going to go and show it as zeros.
Now let's do one more casting where we
change the data type from date time to
date. So now we need our creation
time but we have to get it from the
tables. So from sales orders let's go
and execute it. So now in the output you
can see the creation time is a date
time. We have the time information but
we are not interested about the time
information. I would like to have this
field as a date. So it's very simple
what we're going to do. We're going to
say cast. Now the value is creation time
and then the keyword as and we need it
as a date. So we're going to give it the
name date time to date. So let's go and
execute it. Now as you can see in the
output we got the creation time but only
with the date information. We don't have
anything about the time. So we get it as
a date instead of date time. So that's
it. This is amazing function SQL and
it's very simple and we can use it only
for casting. So only to change the data
type from one to another. And we cannot
use this function in order to change the
format. So if you are casting you will
get always the standard format from
SQL. So now let's go and compare our
functions side by side. So we have our
three functions. cast, convert and
format and we can do two things either
casting or formatting. So by the casting
for the first function cast we can
change any type to any other type. So
there is no restriction at all. The same
thing for the converts the same thing we
can convert anything to anything. But
for the format we can change only to a
string. So any data type like a date or
number to a string value because the
main thing for the format is not
changing the data type. Now if you are
talking about changing the format of the
values, you cannot use the cast function
in order to change the format. So the
cast function is only for casting. It
makes sense. Now about the convert, we
can use it in order to change the format
of the date and time. But we cannot use
it in order to change the number
formats. And for that we have a
dedicated function called format. So we
can use it to change the format of the
date and time and as well the numbers.
So those are the main differences
between those three functions. All
right. So with those three functions we
have learned how to do formatting and
casting on date informations. Now moving
on to the third group we have the date
calculations and here we have two
functions on how to do date calculations
or mathematical operations on the dates.
If okay so now we're going to start with
the first function the date add. So what
is date add? Date add can allow us to
add or subtract a specific time interval
to or from a date. So let's understand
how the date add work. So here again we
have our date August 20th 2025. So now
in some scenarios we would like to add
years to our dates. So for example let's
say I would like to add three years to
our date. So we can do that using the
date ad. So if you do that in the output
you will get 2028 August 20th only the
date part is changed and where we have
added three years but in other scenarios
you would like to go and add months. So
for example let's go and add two months
to the August. So in the output you will
get 2025 10 20 with that we have added
two months and of course we can go and
add days to our dates. So for example
we're going to go and add five days to
our date. So in the output we'll get the
same year 2025 the same month August but
only the day will be changed to 25. So
we have added five days to the original
dates. And of course we can go and
subtract dates even though that the
function called date add. So for
example, we can go and subtract three
years from our dates and we will get So
if you do that, you will get 2022 August
20th or if you go and subtract two
months from our dates. So it's going to
stay the same year 2025. But this time
instead of August, we will go back to
June with the same date 20. And the same
thing going to happen for the days if
you go and subtract five days. So the
same year 2025, the same month August,
but only the days going to be instead of
20, it's going to be 15. So as you can
see with the date ad you can manipulate
the years, the month and the days by
subtracting or adding new intervals. So
this is how the date ad works. All
right. So now let's check the syntax of
the date ad. And here things little bit
more complicated. We have to provide
three informations. The first one is a
part. What do you want to add? Do you
want to add years or months or days and
so on. Then the second one is interval.
So it's like how many days? How many
years? How many months? And then the
last one is the date. This is the date
that we're going to be manipulating by
adding or subtracting intervals. Let's
check the following example. We are
saying here date add. So what is the
part here is a year. That means we want
to manipulate only the year parts. Then
the interval here is two. So it is
positive. We want to add two years. So
it's going to go to each order and start
adding two years for each date value.
Now let's check another example. Here we
are saying date add month. So here we
want to manipulate the month part. But
here we are saying minus4 that means we
want to go and subtract four months from
each value in the order date. So as you
can see the value of the interval
whether it's positive or negative. We
are controlling here the function
whether it is subtraction or addition.
So let's have few examples about the
date add using our field order dates. So
for example let's go and add two years
for each date. So we can do it like this
date adds. So we are adding years that's
why we're going to go with the part year
and how many years we are adding we are
adding two years. So this is our
interval and our field our value is the
order date. So now in the output as you
can see we got a date but this date is
always 2 years higher than the order
date. So everywhere you have see 2027.
Now let's go and add maybe three months
for each date. Just going to go and copy
it and say a month. Let's change the
interval to three and we're going to
call it three
months later. So now if you check the
output over here we have a new date but
now the difference between it and the
order date we have here always three
months more than the order dates. So for
example here we have January but in the
new one we have April and for the next
one we have February and in the new
field we have May. So as you can see we
are adding months over here. So as you
can see we are adding monthses to our
original filled order date. Now let's
say that I would like to go and subtract
10 days. So let's go and do the same. So
we're going to have the date add. Since
we are talking about the days, it's
going to be the day. We're going to
subtract 10 days. So minus 10 for the
order date. So let's call it 10 days
before. Let's go and execute it. Now we
got as well a new date. And this date
has always 10 days before the order
date. So for example, let's take the
order number seven. In the order date we
have 15, but in the new column we have
five. So we have subtracted 10 days from
the original filled order dates. So as
you can see it's very simple to add or
subtract days, year, months using the
date
add. All right. So what is date diff?
diff stands for difference and date diff
can going to can allow us to find the
differences between two dates. All
right. So let's understand how the date
diff works in SQL. Now imagine we have
two dates. We have the order date 2025
August 20th and the shipping date is the
1st of February in the next year 2026.
Now we might ask the question how many
years have passed between the order date
and the shipping date. So in order to
answer this question we can use the
function date diff and we can define the
part year. If you do it like this it's
going to subtract those two dates and it
going to return one. So the date
difference between those two dates is
exactly one year. But now if the
question is how many months are between
the order date and the shipping dates.
So here again we can go and use the date
diff between the order date and the
shipping date but we use the part month.
If you do it like this in the output you
will get three months. And now of course
if the question is how many days are
between the order date and the shipping
dates. So here we can use the function
date diff where we specify the day
inside it and in the output you will get
68. So this is how the date diff works.
You go and subtract two different dates
and you will get in the output a number
how many years how many months how many
days. So that's it. All right. Now to
the syntax of the date diff. It accept
here as well three parameters. So the
first one is the parts as usual year,
month, day. And then here we need two
dates, not only one, we need two. So we
need the starting dates and the ending
dates. So that means here we have the
youngest dates and the end date going to
be the oldest dates. So for example,
here we have date diff and we are saying
find the differences in years between
the order dates. This is the start date
and the shipping dates. So which dates
normally happen? First we have to order
something. So we have the order date and
once you order what can happen next is
the shipping date. That's why the
shipping date is as an end date. So we
want to find the differences between
them in years or of course if you want
to find the differences between them in
days we have to go and change the part
from year to day. So as you can see the
syntax is very simple and very logical
right. All right let's have the
following simple task and it says
calculate the age of employees. So let's
see how we can solve that. So we're
going to go and select first all the
informations from employees. So sales
and employees. Okay, let's execute it.
Now in the employees, we don't have any
informations about the age, but we have
the birthday. So we can go and transform
this birthday to an age. And of course,
how we calculate the age? We count how
many years between this year and the
birthday. So that means we have to go
and use two functions the date diff and
the get day in order to have the year of
the current year. So that means we have
to go and use the function date diff. So
let's go and do that. I'm going to go
first selecting only few informations.
So employee ID and P date. So let's
start with the date diff. So if we are
talking about the age we are calculating
how many years that's why we're going to
say as a part going to be the year. So
what is the starting date is the birth
date of the person. So it's going to be
the birth date. And now we need the end
date. We don't have here anything about
the end date. The end date going to be
the current year. So in order to get the
current year, we're going to go with the
function get dates. And with that we are
getting the current date information.
And this is exactly what we want. So
let's close it and let's go and call it
an age. So it's very simple. We are
counting how many years between the
birth dates and the current dates. So
let's go and execute it. So now we are
getting the ages. As you can see the
first person is 33, the second one is 52
and so on. And now you might getting
different values than I'm getting now.
And that's maybe you are doing the
course now in 2025 or 2026 and the
employees going to be older than now.
Now we are 2024 and I'm getting those
ages. So this is how we calculate the
age using the help of two functions. The
date diff and the get date. Okay. Okay,
so now we have another task for the day
diff and it says find the average
shipping duration in days for each
month. So here we have a lot of
informations. Let's do it step by step.
Let's first find out the shipping
durations in days. So let's go and
select few informations from our table.
So select order ID. We have the order
date, ship
date and I think that's it. So from
sales orders. So let's go ahead and
execute it. So now we have our 10
orders. We have the order date and the
shipping dates. Now we have to go and
create a new field called shipping
duration. So what is the shipping
duration? It is the number of days
between the order dates and the shipping
dates. So how many days it took from the
order placement until the day of the
shipping. So that means we have two
dates and we have to go and find the
differences between them. We're going to
go with the function date diff. So now
since we are saying in days we have to
go with the part day. So what is the
start date? The start date is the order
date. And what is the end date? It's
going to be the shipping dates like
this. So I'm going to call it day to
ship like this. Let's go and execute it.
So now by checking the result for
example for the order one it is ordered
at the 1st of January and it is shipped
on 5th of January. So between those two
dates we have around 4 days. So four is
the shipping duration and if you go to
the order number three the differences
between the order date and the shipping
date we have around 15 days. So with
that we have solved this part shipping
duration in days. But now the task says
we have to find the average duration for
each month. So that means we have to go
and select for example the month of
January and find the average duration.
So we have to go and do a simple
aggregation. We're going to go to the
date if at the start and say average.
And we're going to close it over here.
And let's go and rename it average
shipping. And now we have to aggregate
by the month. So we don't need the whole
order dates. We need the month of the
order date. So like this. We don't need
of course the order ID, but now we need
to group up the data using this
dimension, the month order dates. So
that's it. Let's go and execute it. So
now in the output you can see we have
three months and for each month we have
the average shipping durations in days.
So for the first month it is around 7
days for February is as well 7 days and
for March we have less duration 5 days.
So with that we have solved the task. As
you can see the date diff is very strong
function in order to do data analytics
using the dates information. All right.
Right. So now we have the following task
and it says find the number of days
between each order and the previous
order. So there's a lot of stuff going
on over here. Let's do it step by step.
Let's start by selecting the basic
stuff. So select order ID, order date
from the table sales orders. Let's go
and execute it. So we have our 10 orders
and we have the current order dates. So
now we have to find the differences
between two dates. order dates, the
current one and the previous order
dates. So in our data, we have the
current order dates, but we don't have
the previous order date for each order.
And in order to calculate the previous
one, do you remember about the window
functions? We can go and use the lag in
order to access a value from a previous
records. So let's go and do that. The
order date, I'm just going to call it
current order dates. And let's go and
find the previous order dates. So we're
going to go with the lag of the order
date because we are interested in the
value of the order date. Now over we
have to sort the data. So we're going to
sort it
by the order date as well. So this is
going to help us always to access the
previous value of the order date. So
we're going to call it
previous order date. Let's go and
execute it and let's check the result.
For the first order, we don't have
anything previously. So that's why we
are getting a null. For the second
record, the current order date is the
5th of January and the previous one is
the 1st of January. And this value comes
from the previous record, the previous
order. Great. Amazing. So with that we
have now the two dates, the current date
and the previous one. And now we can go
very simply finding the number of days
between those two dates. And we can do
using the amazing function date diff. So
we are interested on the days that's why
it's going to be the day. So what is the
starting day? If you check those two
dates, you can see that the previous
order date is the starting date. So
we're going to take the whole thing, the
whole window function and put it over
here. So I just moved my picture. So
here is the previous order dates. And
now the end date, what's going to be?
It's going to be the current order date
which is our order date like this. So
again, we are finding the number of days
between the previous dates and the
current dates. So that's it. Let's close
it. So I'm just going to call it number
of
days. So let's go and execute it. Now of
course we have here null. So we will get
as well null in the output. And now you
can check over here how many days
between those two dates. We have exactly
four days. And as well for the next one
we have around 5 days, 10 days and so
on. So we have solved the task. We have
now the number of days between each
order and the previous order. So this
type of analyszis is very important in
the business. We call it time gap
analyzes and we have done it using the
help of the window function and as well
the date function date diff. So date div
function is amazing function to do data
analyzes. All right. So with those two
functions we have learned how to do
mathematical operations on date
informations or we can call it date
calculations. Now moving on to the
easiest and the last group, we have the
date validation. And here we have only
one function, the is
date. Okay. So what is is date? So the
is date is very simple. It's going to
check whether a value is a date. So it
going to return one if the string value
is a valid date or zero if it is not a
valid date. Okay. So let's check quickly
the syntax of the is date. It's very
simple. The keyword is date is the
function name and it accepts only one
value. So for example you can pass a
string like this and you can ask SQL is
it a date. So is date and the value and
of course for this example you will get
true or one. So as you can see we are
passing here a string value and we are
validating whether it is good enough to
be a date or as well you can go and
specify a number like here 2025. So is
this value a date and of course SQL
going to accept it and say yeah this is
a year so you will get as well a one. So
you can pass as well a number or
integer. So you are just checking the
values whether they are suitable enough
to be a date. So that's all about the
syntax of the is dates. Okay. So now
let's have few examples. For example,
let's go and select and we're going to
say is date and we will check a value.
So let's say this value is a string 1 2
3. Let's go and call it date. Check one.
Let's go and execute it. Now in the
output it's going to say no, it is not a
date. And that's why we are getting the
value zero which is correct because 1 2
3 is not a date. Let's pick another
value. The same thing is dates. And now
the value going to be the following. So
2025 August 20. So let's call it date
check 2. And let's go and execute it.
Now in the output we will get one. That
means the value that we have provided is
a date. And that's why we have a one in
the output because ESKL is saying this
is a date. Now let's have another
example. We're going to take the whole
thing. So this is a check three and
remove this from here. But I would like
to go and change the format. So let's
say that we start with the day then
month and then the year. Let's go and
check. Now in the output you can see it
is zero because SQL does not understand
the formats. So we are not following the
standard format of the database and
scale and that's why going to say no
this is not a date. This is like a
string value. So this means only if the
value is following the status format SQL
going to understand this is a date. Now
let's go and check another thing for
example let's say is date and let's have
only the year. So 2025 and let's give it
the name date check for let's go and
execute it. Now in the output we will
get one. So that means is considering
this value as a date. So that means
Iskll is smart enough to understand okay
we have provided a year information and
is going to accept it and say okay maybe
this is the 1st of January of 2025. Now
let's go and do the same thing but for
the month let's see whether SQL going to
accept it. So check five and we have the
month of August. Let's go and check now
going to say no I don't understand this
value this is zero. So that mean this
value is provided is not a date. So by
checking those results as you can see
SQL understand only the standard formats
and it allow you as well to check
whether a year is a date. So this is how
the is date works in SQL. And now you
might ask well when I'm going to do this
when I'm going to check whether the
value is a date or not. Let me give you
this following scenario. Now imagine
that we have the following date. So we
have four values as a string. And now if
you check the data you can see that we
are following the standard format but
only one value has an issue. So we have
here data quality problem. So now what
we want to do, we want to go and cast
this string value to a date. We don't
want this to stay as a string value. We
would like to have it in the final
result as a date. So what we usually do
is that we go and have like subquery on
top of those values. So like this. So
now what we're going to do, we're going
to go and say we would like to go and
cast the order dates as date. We don't
want it as a string. And we're going to
call it order dates from these values.
So let me just make it like this and
let's go and execute it. Now SQL going
to give you an error and say well I
cannot convert everything to a date
because you have maybe corrupt data and
this is of course because of this row.
So SQL is not able to convert this
string to a date. But of course now the
example is very simple. We know that but
if you have a huge table it's going to
be really hard to identify those issues.
But now still I would like to go and
convert those value here. I don't want
to get an error. And now if there is
like some values like here that is
corrupt and so on this value could be
null. So how we can force SQL to convert
the data type from string to date and
not give us this error. And for this we
can go and use the help of the function
is date. Let me show you how I usually
do it. So let's go and say let's check
whether the order date is a date. So
let's have it like this. And now before
we go and execute, I'm going to make
this as a comment because if I execute
it like this, we will get an error. And
let's go and get the order date in our
select. So let's go and execute it. Now
as you can see in the output, we have
our string value. So they are not yet a
date. And we have the result of our
check. So as you can see the first row,
we are getting a zero. So it's saying
this value is not a date. But for all
other values, we are getting one. So
they are passing the check and they are
dates. So now what we're going to do
we're going to go and build a logic
where we're going to say go and cast the
value from string to date only if the
flag or the check is equal to one. So
that means we can go and use the help of
the case when statement. Let me show you
how we can do that. So let's do it step
by step. We're going to say case win.
Now we need the check. So is
dates the order date. So if the output
of this check is equal to one then you
are allowed to do the casting. So let's
go and get the cast as a result of this
condition and if it's not equal to one
then it could stay as a null. So let's
have it as a null if it didn't pass the
test. So end and we can call it new
order dates. So now let's go and execute
it. Now as you can see we are not
getting error from SQL. So now if you
check the output for the invalid dates
we are getting a null. So we are not
getting an SQL error. And now only if
these string values are a valid dates
it's allowed to be casted. So that you
can go and cast a string value to a date
even though that you have bad data
quality and this is very important step
in order to prepare the data before
doing analyszis and it help us as well
to find data quality issues. So for
example we can go over here and say you
know what let's go and search for all
issues. So we're going to go and take
the is dates. So let's go and get the
check and I'm going to say let me see
all string values that are invalid that
are failing the test. So let me execute
it. And with that we are getting this
record. And now imagine we have a lot of
data. So it's now it's really easy to
identify those issues by just using the
S dates. So this is as well amazing way
in order to identify data quality
issues. Now of course you might say you
know what I don't want to see here null.
Maybe let's get a dummy value. Well it's
very easy. We can go over here and say
else. So and we can go and get for
example very large value something like
this that is easy to identify. So now
with that instead of getting nulls
inside your data you can get such a
dummy value. So now you understand the
use case of the is dates and why this
function is amazing doing data
cleanup. All right. So with that we have
covered 13 different date and time
functions in SQL. So we have learned how
to extract the date parts using seven
different functions and we have learned
as well when to use which one. So they
are amazing in order to do data
aggregations and as well filtering. And
then we have learned how to change the
date format from one to another and as
well how to change the data types. And
then we learned how to do mathematical
operations on our dates. So how we can
add or subtract days, years, months from
a date or the amazing function the date
diff where we can go and find the
differences in days or years between two
days. And the last one we can go and
validate whether the values that we have
are dates or not. So as we learned date
functions are amazing functions in order
to do data analyzes and reporting. All
right my friends. So with that we have
learned a lot of very important SQL
functions and how to manipulate the date
and time values in your database using
SQL. Now in the next section we're going
to start talking about the null
functions in order to handle the nulls
inside your tables. So let's go.
So what are the nulls? Imagine you are
filling out a forum and there will be
usually like fields that are required
and another fields that are optional. So
what usually happens? We leave those
optional fields unanswered. So we don't
provide any values and we leave it
empty. And now once we are done filling
out the form and we click on register,
the data will be inserted into database
tables. So now what can happen? The
fields where you have provided answers
and values can be filled inside the
table while the unanswered fields will
have no value and this is what we call
in SQL a null. So in databases a null
means nothing unknown. It is not equal
to anything. So it is not equal to zero
or empty string or blank space. A null
is simply nothing. It tells us there is
no value and it is missing. It's like
saying I don't know what this value is.
So this is what a null means in
SQL. All right friends, so now we're
going to do a deep dive into special SQL
functions on how to handle the nulls
inside our data. Now in some scenarios
we have nulls inside our tables and we
would like to go and remove it and
replace it with a new value like for
example 40. And in order to do that in
scale we have two functions. The first
one called is a null and the second one
called coales. But now let's say that we
have another scenario where we have a
value inside our table like the 40 and
we want to go and make it as a null. So
now we are doing the exact opposite. We
are replacing the value with a null and
for that we have the SQL function null
if. So as you can see with those two
scenarios we are replacing stuff. So
from null to value or from value to
null. So they are really helpful in
order to manipulate the data inside our
databases. Now moving on to another
scenario where we don't want to
manipulate anything. We want just to
check. So we don't want to replace or
convert anything. We want just to check
in our database whether we have a null
value. And for that we have a function
called is a null. But between the is and
null there is like space. It is
different than the first function. So if
you apply is null you're going to get a
boolean true or false. For this scenario
you will get true. Or the second option
you can go and check whether the value
is not null. So we can use is not null
and for this example you can get false.
So in the output we are getting a
boolean true or false. So those keywords
are really amazing in order to check
whether we have nulls inside our data.
So this is the big picture of all
functions that we have in SQL in order
to handle the nulls. So now let's go and
understand those functions one by one.
So let's start with the first function
is null. Is null going to go and replace
a null with a specific value. Now the
syntax of the isnull is very simple.
We're going to use the keyword is a null
and it accepts two arguments. First the
value and then the second the
replacement value. So let's have an
example. We can go and use the is null
for the column called shipping address.
So we are checking the nulls inside it.
And if SQL encounters any null, it going
to go and replace it with the value
unknown. So this going to be like a
default value for the nulls. So the
first value is a column and the second
value is like static. Always going to be
the unknown if we find any nulls. Now of
course in other scenarios we don't want
to have it always like the unknown. We
would like to use another column to help
the first one. So let's have this
scenario. So now with this syntax we are
checking the values of the shipping
address and if we find any nulls it's
going to get the replacement from the
billing address. So here in this example
we have two columns. We don't have here
any static value. We will get the values
of the billing address only if the
shipping address is null. So we are
replacing the nulls using the help of
other column. And in the first scenario
we are replacing the nulls with a static
value the default value. So let's have a
very simple example in order to learn
how this works. So what we are doing we
are checking whether the value is null.
If it's yes then we're going to go and
get the value from the replacement and
if the value is not null then show the
value itself. So we have the following
example. We are going to check the
values from the shipping address and if
there is nulls then go replace it with
the default value na. So let's see how
going to go and execute this very simple
example. We have two orders. The first
order we are checking the submit address
is the value of this address is null.
Well, no. We have a value a. So that's
why it's scale going to go and return
the same value. So in the outputs we
will get a. So if it's not null, it's
going to return the same value. So now
it's going to move to the second order
and here we have the shipment address as
a null. So what going to happen here? If
the value is null, then we going to get
the replacement value. So what is the
replacement value is the NA. So that's
why in the output we will not get a null
we will get the N A. So if you check the
result what happens? We're going to get
the addresses from the shipping address
but only if we have a null we will get
like default value. It's very important
to understand if you are using the
default value in the output you will
never get a null. All right. So let's
have another example for the second
scenario where we are not using a
default value we are using a column. So
we have a supportive column that's going
to be checked. So in this scenario we
are saying is null shipping address and
billing address. So we have two columns
and of course the logic going to be the
same right. So we are checking only
once. Let's see how SQL going to execute
this example. We have this time three
orders and we have addresses from the
shipments and as well from billing. So
now SQL is always focusing on the
shipping address since it is the first
column. So we are not checking the
billing address at all. So it start with
the first order. Is it null? Well, no,
we have the value A. So, we will get it
as well in the output and SQL will not
get anything from the billing address.
So, we will get a. So, that's it for the
first order. Now, it's still going to go
to the second order. And this time,
we're going to have a null. So, now in
the rule, we are saying if the shipping
address is a null, go get the value from
the billing address. So, this time we're
going to go to the replacement, right?
So we will get the value C in the output
because the shipping address is the
null. Now let's move to the third row.
As you can see here we have again null.
So SQL going to go and get the value
from the billing address. But here in
this scenario the billing address is as
well null. That's why we will get the
value null in the output. So as you can
see having the replacements values from
a column there is no guarantee that
there will be always a value like here
in the third order it is a null that's
why we will get null as well in the
output. So if you think you are using is
null to replace all the nulls by having
two columns you might end up as well
having a null in the output if the
replacement having nulls. So if you want
to make sure you don't get any nulls in
the output you have to go and use a
static value. So this is how SQL execute
the
isnull. All right. So what is coales?
Coal is going to go and return the first
null value from a list. All right. So
now the syntax of the coales is way
better than the is null. Here it accepts
like a list of many values. So here for
example we have value 1 2 3 you can add
four five as much as you want. So we are
creating here a list of values to be
checked. So for example, we still can
use it like the isnull where we have the
shipping address where we replace the
null with a static value the unknown or
as we learned we can go and use two
columns shipping address and the billing
address. So so far it's like the same
use cases as the is null but now of
course the kalis is not only limited to
two we can go and use three. So we are
saying go check the shipping address if
it's null then go check the billing
address. If it is as well null then use
at the end the default value the static
one the unknown. So as you can see we
can use more than two values with the
coalis. Okay. So now let's understand
the cowless and how this works. Now the
workflow is something similar to the
isnull. So in this example we have two
columns shipping address and the billing
address. It's going to consider it as a
list and it's going to start checking
from left to right. So it's going to
check the first value from the shipping
address whether it's null. If no, it's
not null then we're going to go and get
the value one. So we will get the value
from the shipping address. And if yes,
it is null then it's going to go and get
the value two. So we're going to get the
value from the shipping address. Now we
have the similar data. We have three
orders. Let's see how going to execute
it. So it's going to start with the
first row and it's going to focus on the
shipping address. So here the value is
not null. So we have it as an A. So
that's why we will get the value one. So
we will get the value from the shipping
address and nothing else going to be
checked. Now moving on to the second
row. This time the shipping address is
null. So it's going to go and get the
value from the second column and it's
going to be the C. Right? So in the
output we will get C. Now to the last
example, we have it as a null and it's
going to go and get the value from the
second column and this time we're going
to get as well a null like the is null
function. So at the results we are
getting exactly the same result as
isnull. So for this scenario it doesn't
matter whether you use isnull or
kowalis. So now of course we are still
not happy with that because I don't want
to see any nulls in the output and I
will still need to use the billing
address instead of any static values. So
I would like to have everything the
values from the billing address and as
well I would like to have at the end a
default value so that I don't have any
nulls in the output. So how we going to
solve it? So now we can use the power of
the account list where we can include
multiple values in one function. So what
we're going to do we're going to have
the shipping address first then the
billing address and at the end we're
going to have the default value. So we
have now a list of three values and of
course our workflow going to be a little
bit bigger. So again here it's going to
start from the left to the right. So
first it's going to go and check the
value one. If it is null then it's going
to go as well checking the value two.
And if the value two is as well null, we
will get the last value. It's going to
be the value three. So now let's run the
example again using the new kalis. So
the first thing we're going to go and
check the first value which is the
shipping address for the record number
one. So now as you can see the value is
not null. So we have here an a. So what
going to happen? We're going to get the
value a as well in the output. So that
means this one going to be activated and
we will not check anything else. So that
means in the output it's going to be
like this. and the first value is
returned and everything else will be
ignored. So, SQL will not check
anything. So, as you can see, we are
returning the first null value. So, now
let's move to the second order. Now,
we're going to check again the first
value. Is it null? Well, yes. As you can
see, we have here a null. So, that means
we're going to go and activate this path
over here on the right side. So, now SQL
will not go blindly putting anything
from the billing address in the results.
First SQL has to check it. So SQL going
to check it whether it's null or not.
SQL going to go and return it as well in
the output. And we have activated this
path. So SQL is returning the value two
which is the value from the billing
address. So now let's move to the third
order. SQL first going to go and check
the shipping address. Is it null? Well
yes it is null. So that's why SQL going
to go and start checking the second
value. So this time SQL will not return
the billing address value since it's
null. It's going to go and return the
third value. And what is the third
value? It is our static value the NA. So
in the output we're going to get the NA
our default value. So with that as you
can see in the output we will not get
any nulls. We are using the default
value and as well multiple columns. So
if you check the output, it's always the
first priority to check the values from
the first column, the shipping address.
If it's null, then the second priority
going to be the billing address. If it's
null, then the last priority, it's going
to be the default value. So as you can
see, SQL is checking the values from
left to right and it stops immediately
once it encounters the first not null
value and return it in the results. So
this is how the cow works.
All right. So now let's have a quick
summary about the differences between
the kowalis and isnull. So as we learned
the isnull is limited only to two values
where the kowalis is amazing where you
can have a list of multiple values which
is a great advantage compared to the
isnull. Now if you are talking about the
performance the isnull is faster than
the kawalis. So if you want to optimize
the performance of your query then go
with the isnull. Now there is another
problem with the isnull is that we have
different keywords for different
databases. So for Microsoft SQL server
we use the isnull as we learned but in
Oracle they have different
implementations they use the NVL and
other database like MySQL you have if
null and all those three functions are
doing the same but we have different
implementations for different databases
but in the other hand the cowis it is
available in all different databases. So
here we have like an agreement or
standards between the databases of using
the kowalis. So here again this is a
great advantage for the kowalis because
if you are writing like scripts and
someday you want to migrate from one
database to another. If you are using
the kowalis you don't have to change
anything but if you are using the isnull
then you have to go and adjust your
queries and scripts with the correct
functions. That's why I tend always to
use the kalis and avoid using the
isnull. Only if it's really necessary
that I have really bad performance, I go
and try the isnull. But I usually stick
with the kowalis. So that is my advice
for you. Go with the kowalis and stick
with the standard.
Now the use cases of the kowalis and the
isnull are very similar and we mainly
use them in order to handle the null
before doing any SQL task. For example,
we can use them in order to handle the
null before doing data aggregations. So
let's understand what this means.
Imagine that we have three sales. We
have 15, 25, and a null. Now if you go
and use an aggregate functions like the
average, what's going to happen? SQL
going to calculate it like this. 15 + 25
divided by two and the average is going
to be 20. So as you can see here SQL is
including only the two values 15 and 25
and ignores totally the null value. So
in the calculations the null will not be
included because if SQL does that the
output going to be as well null. So the
nulls are totally ignored. Now the same
thing can happen with the other
aggregate functions like the sum count
if you are counting the sales min and
max. There is only one exception about
the aggregate function count. If you are
using it with the star, SQL here is
considering not the values. SQL going to
consider the rows. That's why SQL going
to go and include all those rows and
find the output going to be three. Now
in some scenarios, if your business
understand the null as zero, then you're
going to have a problem with the result
of your analyzes if you don't handle the
nulls. So what we have to do? We have to
handle the null before doing the
aggregations. So we have to go and
replace a null with zero using either
the isnar or the kowalis. So once you do
that the calculation going to be changed
for the average. So it's going to be 15
+ 25 + 0 divided by 3 and the output
this time going to be 13.3. So with that
you're going to get more accurate
results for the business if they
understand nulls as zero. All right. So
now we have the following example. It
says find the average scores for the
customers. So let's go and solve it. So
we're going to go and select the
customer ID, the score from table
customers. So let's go and execute it.
So as you can see, we have four
customers with score and the last one
doesn't have any score. So we have it as
a null. Let's go and calculate the
average for the score and I would like
to have the window function in order to
see the details as well. So this is
average scores. So let's go and execute
it. Now of course what is going on here?
The four values going to be added to
each others and divided by four and the
null is totally ignored. Now of course
the question is what the business
understand with the null. If it is zero
then we have inaccurate results. So
let's go and fix it. Now this time we're
going to say okay we're going to have
the average but instead of score we're
going to handle the nulls first. So we
have to replace any nulls with zero. We
can go and use the kowalis or the
isnull. So I will go with the cabalis
like this and score if you find any null
make it zero. So that's it and as well I
will go with the window function. So
average scores let's call it two. Now
let's go and execute it. Now as you can
see in the output we got 500 and this is
different than the previous average and
that's because we have replaced the null
with zero. Let's just go and display it
in order to understand it. So I will
copy it and put it here. So let's call
it score two and execute it. So now SQL
is going to summarize all those values
and divided by five and that's why we
are getting the 500. So if our business
understand the null as a zero this
average going to be more accurate after
we handle the null. As you can see in
some scenarios we have to handle the
nulls before doing any data
aggregations.
All right, moving on to the next use
case for the kowalis and isnull. We can
use them in order to handle the nulls
before doing any mathematical
operations. So let's understand what
this means using the plus operator. So
if you do plus operator between two
numbers like 1 + 5, you are summarizing
the values and you will get six. And if
you do the plus operator between string
values like a + b. So now what we are
doing, we are doing data concatenations
and the output going to be a b. So now
if you go and replace the one with a
value like zero. So 0 + 5 we will get
five. Nothing fancy about that. And for
the strings if you go and replace a
value with an empty string. So there is
zero characters between the two quotes
plus the B. So in the output you will
get only B. So it's fine and nothing is
critical. But now we come to the
problem. If you use a null if you
replace the one with null in the output
you will get a null. because you are
saying okay five plus something that I
don't know so SQL says okay you are
summarizing now a value with a no value
it is unknown so I don't as well know
what going to be the answer that's why
going to say it's going to be null just
don't know what is the answer and the
same thing can happen with anything else
like the string so if you're saying null
plus b and here going to say the same
thing the null is unknown and the answer
going to be as well unknown so my
friends this is very critical in the
analyzes and working with data. So this
means we have to handle the nulls before
doing any mathematical operations. And
this is not only for the plus operator,
it's as well for the other operators
like minus and so on. All right. So now
let's have the following task. And it
says display the full name of the
customers in a single field by merging
their first and last names and add 10
bonus points for each customer's score.
So let's go and solve it. We're going to
select first the basic informations.
Let's get the customer ID. What do we
need? the first name, the last name and
we need the scores. So that's it from
sales customers. Let's go and execute
it. Now the first task is that we have
to generate a new field called full name
where we have to go and merge or
concatenate their first and last names.
So let's go and do that. We need the
first name plus and then let's have a
space between the first and last name
and then plus let's have the last name
as
full name. So let's go and execute it.
Now if you check the result for the
first customer it is working. So we have
Joseph Goldenberg. The same thing for
the second customer. But for the third
customer we have here a problem.
Customer doesn't have any last name but
she has a first name. So we have here a
Mary. So the full name here is
completely null which is not correct.
For this example we have at least to
show the first name Mary even though
that the last name is missing. So the
result is not really accurate and that's
because we are doing the plus operator
between a null and marry. So that means
we have to go and handle the nulls
before doing any plus operator. So again
here we can go with the cowless or the
isnull. So let's go and create a new
field using the cowless. So it's going
to be the last name and now we have to
define a new value. If it's null so we
could have like something unknown or we
could have like an empty string and we
can do that using two quotes and between
them there is nothing. So we are using
an empty string. So let's go and check
the results. Last name two. So let's go
and execute it. Now we can see that the
last name over here for marry it has an
empty string and it is not anymore a
null. So now SQL knows okay this is a
string and there is no characters inside
it. So with that SQL knows more
informations and we can go and now
concatenate those informations. So let's
go and do that. We're going to take the
whole thing and replace the last name
with the kowalis. So let me just remove
this last name over here and execute it.
So now as you can see things looks
better. Now we have in the full name for
mari only the first name. And of course
if you don't like it like this you would
like to have another default value. You
can go over here and say something like
in a not available. So let's go and
execute it. And with that you can see
immediately uh there is here a missing
last name. But it doesn't really look
good. So I will just remove it and go
with the empty string. We're going to go
and execute it. So with that we have
solved the first part of the task where
we have the full names and we are not
missing any informations from the first
name and the last name. Now let's go to
the second part of the task where we
have to add 10 bonus points for each
customer score. So we have to go and add
a 10 for each score. So let's go and do
it. I'm going to put it at the end. So
score + 10 and let's give it the name
score with bonus. So that's it. Let's go
and execute it. So now in the output you
can see it's very easy. We have added a
10 for each score. So we have increased
the score points for each customer. But
now for the last customer Anna you can
see over here she doesn't have a value
in the scores and that's why didn't go
and added 10. So we will get as well a
null. And of course this might not be
fair that the last customer is not
getting any point even though that we
have increased for all others. So that
means we have to go and handle the null
by replacing the null to zero. And only
after that we're going to add a plus to
it. So let's go and do that. I'm going
to add a
kalis if it is null then go and make it
zero. And afterward go and add a 10
points. So let's go and execute it. So
now as you can see at the results
everything now is fair where we have a
10 bonus points for each customers even
if the customer doesn't have any values
in the scores like here Anna she has
like null but still she is getting a 10
points. So here again as you can see if
you don't handle the nulls correctly
before doing the mathematical operations
you might get unexpected results. So be
careful with the nulls and handle them
correctly before adding anything.
Okay, moving on to the next use case for
the kowalis and is null. We can use them
in order to handle the null before doing
joins. This is little bit advanced use
case but it's very important to
understand it. So let's understand why
this is important. Let's have for
example two tables table A and table B.
And in some scenarios we have to go and
combine those two tables using the
joins. And now in order to join two
tables, we have to go and specify the
keys between the table A and table B in
order to join on it. So in this example,
we have two keys in order to join the
tables. Now here comes the special case.
If those keys don't have any nulls
inside it and all the data are filled,
then your join going to work perfectly
and you will get the expected results.
And now you might have a special case
where there are nulls inside the keys.
So there are missing values and this is
a big problem because in the output you
will get unexpected results and some
records will be totally missing. So in
this scenario we have to handle the
nulls inside the keys before doing the
joins. Let's have a very simple example
in order to understand this behavior.
All right. So now let's have this very
simple example where we have two tables
and we want to combine them. So in the
first table we have a year type orders
and in the second table we have as well
year type and we have sales. So now we
would like to go and combine those two
tables in order to have all informations
in one result. Now we can go of course
and use the inner join between the table
one and table two and the keys for the
joins here. As you can see we have the
year in both of the tables and as well
the type. So we're going to go and use
both of those columns as a key for the
join. So let's do it step by step how
going to execute this. So we need the
year type and the results. So it's going
to go and take those two columns to the
results and we need the orders and
sales. So it's going to take as well the
orders and the sales from the second
table. So now let's start doing it row
by row. So the first key going to be
those two columns. So we have 2024 and
the type A. So now it's going to start
searching for those two informations in
the second table. And as you can see we
have here a match, right? So the first
row is as well matching since it's inner
join it going to present in the output
only the matching rows from left and
right. So in the outputs we're going to
get the whole row from the table one and
we will get the sales from the table
two. All right. So that's all for the
first row. Now let's move to the second
row over here. So what are the values of
the keys? We have 20 24 and null. So now
if you check the matches on the right
side you can see we have a match here
right it is logical so it's as well 20
24 and null so everything is matching
and we should get it in the result right
SQL cannot go and use the equal operator
in order to join tables so even though
that is logically it makes sense to have
it at the output but still SQL cannot go
and compare the nulls that's why this is
a problem for this combination SQL will
not find any matching So we will not get
any informations for the combination of
2024 and null. So for us of course in
the business this is missing
informations and as well inaccurate
results. So we're going to miss this row
and it's still going to go and jump to
the third row. So here what are the
values of the key. We have 20 25 and B.
Now it's going to go and search it in
the second table and it's still going to
find a match over here. So in the
outputs we're going to get those values.
The the orders going to be 50, the sales
300. Now it's going to go to the last
row and we have here again the same
problem. We have here 2025 and null. And
of course if you check the data you will
say yes we have a matching over here but
SQL would ignore it. So we have exactly
the same situation and we will not find
it at the results. So at the output we
will get only two rows even though that
those two tables are like identicals if
you compare the keys. So with that we
are losing data at the results and we
are providing inaccurate results. So my
friends if you have nulls inside your
keys what can happen you will lose
records at the output. So here it's very
important to handle the nulls inside the
keys before doing the joins. All right
so now in order to fix it we're going to
go and use either the kalis or the
isnull in the join. So as you can see we
are not using the type directly. We are
handling it by replacing the null with
an empty string. It doesn't matter which
value you are using. The main thing is
that you have a value and SQL can go and
map it. So you could have it as empty
string or a blank or any default value.
But I usually go with the empty string
since it's little bit faster than having
any other characters. So now what going
to happen is we're going to go
everywhere and replace those nulls with
an empty string. So now we don't have
any nulls inside our keys and let's go
and see what can happen. So we're going
to start with the first row again. Here
we have a matching from the right table
and we're going to see the whole records
in the outputs. So we will get as well
the sales as 100. And now it's going to
go to the second row over here. So this
time we don't have a null. We have 2024
and an empty string. So now it's going
to go and search for a match and it's
going to find it over here. we have as
well 2024 and an empty string. So now
what can happen in the outputs we're
going to get a
204 but here we will get a null. So we
will not get an empty string we will get
a null over here and that's because we
are handling the null only on the join.
So as you can see we have here the is
null type on the join but we don't have
it on the select. So in the select the
type going to be like the original data
and the original data was a null. We are
just handling the null in the joints
just in order to let SQL understand how
to map and match the data. So in this
example, I'm not changing the values in
the select. So that's why we will get
the original value. But the orders we
will get it 40 and the sales going to be
20. Now moving on to the third row. I
think you already get it. So let's going
to find the match and the sales going to
be 300. All right. Now we're going to
move to the last one. And here we have
the same scenario. So we have 2025 and
an empty string. So it's not null
anymore. And SQL going to go and search
for all those informations and it's
going to find it over here. So SQL going
to take this fields over here in the
type in null not an empty string because
in the select we didn't handle it. So
the order going to be 60 and the sales
going to be 200. So as you can see now
the result is complete. We successfully
combined both of those tables in one big
results using joins but as well using
the help of the isnull function in order
to have a complete results and not miss
any value. So my friends be very careful
check always the keys whether they have
nulls or not and if you find nulls go
immediately and handle it so you don't
lose any records in the results and you
get accurate
analyzes. All right, moving on to the
next use case for the isnull. We can use
it in order to handle the nulls before
sorting the data. So imagine we have the
following sales 15 25 and null. Now if
you go and sort the data by the sales
ascending from the lowest to the highest
what can happen? SQL going to show the
nulls at the start and that is not
because the null is the lowest value
because null has no value. But SQL show
it like this. it's going to place it at
the start and then below it we're going
to have the lowest value. So it is the
15 and at the end we're going to have
the 25. Now if you are doing the exact
opposite where we are sorting the data
from the highest to the lowest using
descending. So what going to happen is
going to sort it like this. We're going
to have 25 then 15 and the last thing
that going to appear in the list going
to be the null. So here SQL is showing
the nulls at the end and that is again
not because nulls are the lowest value
it has no value but SQL do it like this
show it at the end. So this is how SQL
deals with the nulls if you are sorting
the data. So in order to understand this
use case let's have the following task.
So the task says sort the customers from
the lowest to the highest scores with
nulls appearing last. All right. So
let's solve it. This going to be very
interesting one. So we need the customer
informations. So let's go and select and
we need the customer ID and the scores
from sales customers and let's go and
execute it. So we have a simple list of
all customers and their scores. But now
we have to go and sort the data from the
lowest to the highest. So we're going to
go and use the order by clause and we
need the field score. And since it's
lowest to the highest that means we need
to have the ascending and in SQL it is a
default. So we don't have to go and
mention it. So let's go and execute it.
So now as you can see in the results it
start from the lowest to the highest and
the first part of our task is solved.
But now of course we have an issue right
because we have a null and as we learned
SQL going to put it at the first place
on the list. But the task says with
nulls appearing last. So we really don't
want to see the nulls at the start. We
don't worry about it. So we would like
to have it at the end of the list. So
that means we have to go and handle the
nulls before sorting the data. And here
we have two ways to do it. One way that
is lazy and the other one is more
professional. So let me show you first
the lazy way. We're going to go and
replace the null with a very big number.
So for example, what we're going to do,
we're going to go and use the kowalis
and we're going to say okay score and
then let's have a lot of number so that
we have a really big score. I just want
to select it in order to see the
results. So as you can see it's a very
big number here. So if you take this and
replace the order by with the new score.
So that's it. Let's go and execute it.
So now if you check the results we have
already solved the task. We have listed
all the customers from the highest to
the lowest and the nulls are at the end.
So now the question why do we call this
lazy or not professional and that's
because we are defining a static value.
And of course for this example it is
working but we don't know later what's
going to happen. Maybe things change
where in this course you're going to get
a higher value than this and then
sorting the data will make no sense
since the null going to be like in
between values. So who knows your value
might be a real value inside the data.
Now let me show you the other way which
is more professional in order to solve
this task where we don't play with luck
at all. So let's go and do that. Let me
just move this little bit here. I'm
going to go and create a new logic where
we're going to say case when if the
score is null then what's going to
happen we want the value one otherwise
the value going to be zero so end so we
are just creating a flag with zero and
one if the score is null then we're
going to get the flag of one if we have
a value for the score we will get zero
so let's have it like this and I will
just go and get rid of this kalis so
let's go and execute it Now if you check
our new nice flag you can see we have
zeros everywhere where we have a value
in the score but only once we have a
null we will get the flag of one. So now
once we got this what we're going to do
we're going to go and sort our data
based on this flag and the score even
though the task is not mentioning
anything about the flag but we are using
it in order to force the nulls to be at
the end of the result. Let me show you
how we're going to do that. So let me
just remove all this. So first we want
to sort the data by our new flag in
order to make sure that the nulls at the
end. So we're going to have our flag and
then afterward we sort the data by the
score. So let's go and have the score.
So again what we are doing first sort
the data by the flag in order to push
the nulls at the end. And now once all
those values are equal to each others
what's going to happen SQL going to go
and sort the data by the score. So SQL
going to use the scores in order to sort
the data and both of them are ascending.
Let's go and execute it. Now as you can
see we're going to get exactly same
results. The values from the lowest to
the highest and the nulls are at the
end. And as you can see with the order
by we didn't use any static values or
any big numbers. And of course we don't
need the flag at the select. So we can
go and remove it. So let's execute it.
And with that we have solved the task.
So as you can see we can use those nice
functions like the cowis or the isnull
in order to handle the nulls before
sorting your
data. So what is the function null if
null if going to go and compare two
values and it going to returns a null if
they are equal otherwise if they are not
equal it going to returns the first
value. Okay. Okay. So now the syntax of
the null if it accepts only two values
value one and value two. So here again
of course you can go and use a column
with a static value like the unknown. So
we are comparing the values between a
column and a static value or you can go
and compare two columns the shipping
address and the billing address. So
again here it accepts only two values.
We cannot have it like the kalis where
we have a list of multiple values. All
right. So now let's understand exactly
what do we mean with the null if. So the
workflow going to be like this. SQL
going to go and check two values the
value one and the value two. And if they
are equal then SQL going to go and
return a null. But if the two values are
not equal going to go and return the
first value. So it is the one on the
left side. So by checking the outcomes
here we will never have a scenario where
we're going to get the second value.
That means the second value always used
as a check. So we are checking against
this value. So either we're going to get
the value one or a null. Let's have this
very simple example. We are saying null
if price and we are checking whether
it's equal to minus1. So we are saying
if the price is equal to minus1 then go
and replace it with a null because it is
data quality issue that we have a price
that is negative. It makes no sense for
our business. And if it is minus1 then
it means for us a null. We don't know
the price of this product. So we will
correct it using the null if. Let's
check this very simple example. We have
two orders. So SQL going to start with
the first order and check the first
value. So what is the first value? Is
the price. So here we have a 90. SQL
going to go and check is 90 equal to
minus one. Well, no. That means it's
going to go and execute this path. So
that means in the output we will get the
first value which is 90. So in the
output we will get a 90. Now let's move
to the second order. Here we have a
minus one. So SQL going to check is
minus one here equal to the minus one
that we have in the null if well yes. So
that means SQL going to go and execute
this path where we were going to get the
null value in the output and we're going
to get it like this. So now if you
compare the result from null if and the
price you can see we don't have any more
the minus one. And as you can see now we
are doing exactly the opposite as
kowalis and is null. We are replacing a
real value with a null. Now moving on to
the second example and this is very
interesting one in the analytics where
we can go and use two columns inside the
null if. So in this example we are
saying null if original price and
discount price. So SQL have to go and
compare the prices between those two
columns and if they are equal it should
return a null. And now you might say
okay in this example why we are doing
this? Well we can use it in order to
highlight or flag special cases inside
our data. And the special case here is
if the original price is equal to the
discount price and if those two prices
are equals that means we have an issue
in our program or something like went
wrong as we are inserting data. So let's
see what's going to happen for the first
row we're going to go and compare the
150 from the original price with the
discount price. So they are not equal
right. So that means going to go and
return the original price the 150 in the
output. So let's move to the second
order. Here we have the original price
250 and as well the discount price is
250. So they are equal and if they are
equal then we will get a null in the
output. So as you can see again here we
are not getting any values from the
discount. We are using it only for a
check. So with that we have a quick flag
like using the nulls as flag in order to
identify where we have equal values. So
this is how the null if works.
All right friends, here we have a very
nice use case for the null if and that
is preventing the error of dividing by
zero. Let's see what this means. Okay,
let's have the following task and it
says find the sales price for each order
by dividing the sales by quantity. So
let's go and solve it. This should be
very easy. So we need the order ID. We
need the sales and the
quantity from sales orders. Let's go and
execute it. So now we have 10 orders.
Those are the sales and the quantity. So
now it's very easy to calculate the
price. It's going to be the sales
divided by quantity and we're going to
call it price. So let's go and execute
it. Now as you can see we got an error
says divide by zero error encountered.
So that means somewhere we have a zero
for the quantity and this is a problem.
Let's go and check the data again. So
I'm just going to comment the whole
thing and let's go and execute it. So
now by checking the result yes we got
for the order ID 10 here we have
quantity zero. So it will not work if
you divide by zero of course. So how we
can solve it? We can use the magic of
the null if where we're going to go and
replace the zero with a null. So getting
a null is way better than getting an
error. Right? So let's go and do that.
I'm just going to remove the comments.
And here we're going to say null if if
the quantity equal to the zero value. So
that's it. Let's go and execute it. Now
as you can see it is working. And with
that we are making sure that we are not
dividing by zero. And that's because we
replace it with a null. And if you
divide anything by null you will get a
null. So if you check the result over
here the order 10 we got the price of
null which is correct and for the all
other values everything is working
because we have values and we didn't
replace it with a null that's why we
have values for the price and this is
very common use case for the null if we
can use it in order to prevent dividing
by
zero. All right so what is is null? It's
going to return true if the value is
null. So it is checking the value if
it's null it's going to return true
otherwise it's going to returns a false.
Now the exact opposite if you go use the
is not null. So if you use these
keywords it's going to returns a true if
the value is not null otherwise if it is
null it's going to go and return a
false. Okay. So the syntax for that is
very simple. It start with a value or
expression and then after that we're
going to have the keyword is space null
and the is not is exactly the same. So
we have a value then afterwards we have
the is not null. So we have the not
operator after that and the is not is
exactly the same. So we have a value
then we have the is not the not operator
then the null. So it's very simple.
Let's have an example. We are checking
whether the values of the shipping
address is null. So we can have it like
this. Shipping address is null or we can
check the opposite whether it's not
null. So the shipping address is not
null. It's very easy. Okay. So now let's
understand how this works. we are
checking the value. So if the value is
null then return a true if it is not
null then we return a false. So as you
can see it never returns the value
itself or any nulls. So we are getting a
boolean of true and false. So we are
creating like a boolean flag in order to
assist us with the checks. So we have
this very simple example price is null
and we have those two rows. So we are
checking whether the price is null in
the first order it is not null right
that's why we will get a false in the
output and the second order the value is
null so it is correct that's why we will
get true now of course if we go and use
the is not null is going to be exact
opposite so is the price not null well
yes it's not null that's why you will
get a true over here so now for the
second check it is null right so the
output going to be false we will get the
exact opposite. So that's it. It's very
simple how the isnull and is not null
works. All right. One very obvious use
case for is null and is not null is by
searching for missing informations or
searching for nulls. And maybe after
that we can go and clean up our data by
removing the nulls from our data set.
Let's have the following task and it
says identify the customers who has no
scores. All right, let's go and solve
it. This is very simple. So let's start
by selecting star from sales customers.
So we need everything. Let's go and
execute it. Now as you can see we have
our five customers. But the task says we
have to have all the customers who have
no score. So that means the result
should return only the last record since
the score of Anna is null. So let's go
and have a wear clause. So where and now
what do we need? We need the score. Then
we don't use the equal, we use is null
like this. So that's it. Let's go and
execute it. And with that, as you can
see, it's very simple. We have filtered
our data and now we can see all the
customers where the score is null. This
is a very basic check to understand
whether our data contains nulls. All
right, moving on to the next task and it
says show a list of all customers who
have scores. So back to our example,
this time we're going to do exactly the
opposite. We want a list of all
customers where we have a value in the
scores. So what we're going to do, we're
going to say where score is not null. So
if you go and execute it, you can see
we're going to get a clean list where
all the customers have score. And with
that, we get rid of all nulls inside the
score field. And maybe this is helpful
in order to do further analyzes.
All right friends, now we come to very
interesting use case for the isnull and
that is by introducing a new type of
joints between tables that's going to
help us to find the unmatching rows
between two tables. Let's have a quick
recap about the joints in SQL in order
to understand the new types. So
basically we have two sets or let's say
two tables the left and the right. And
if you go and use an inner join what we
are doing here we are finding only the
matching rows between the left table and
the right table. So at the result we
will get only the matching rows. Now we
have another type of joints called lift
outer join. And if you use this type at
the result you will get all the rows
from the left table and as well only the
matching rows from the right table. Now
we have another type which is exactly
the opposite the right join. And here
we're going to get all the rows from the
right table and only the matching
informations from the left table. And
now to the last type that we learned. We
have the full join where we will get all
the rows from the left and as well all
the rows from the right. So we will not
be missing anything. So those are the
four basic joints that we have learned
in SQL. But in SQL we have as well other
types that are more advanced. But we
don't have in SQL any keywords for that.
So the first one called lift anti-join.
So what we are saying here we need all
the rows from the left table but this
time without the matching rows. So all
the informations that are matching with
the right table we don't want to see it
at the results. And as I said we don't
have here an extra keyword for this type
of join. But in order to get this effect
we're going to go and combine the left
join together with the isnull. And with
that we're going to get all the data
from the left side but without anything
that is matching the right side. And
this we call it left anti- join. And we
have another advanced type for the
joints called the right anti- join. This
is exactly the opposite. So we are
saying all the rows from the right table
without having any matching rows from
the left table. So all the informations
on the right side that is not matching
the left side. So again here we don't
have a keyword for that. We're going to
go and work with the right join plus and
is null. So with that, as you can see,
we have two new types of joins added to
our four basic joins. Now this might be
confusing. Let's have the following task
in order to understand it. Show a list
of all details for customers who have
not placed any orders. All right. So
let's see how we can create the effect
of the left anti-join. So let's do it
step by step. We need here two tables.
We need the customers and as well the
orders. So since we are focusing on the
customers, the lift table going to be
the customers. So let's go and do that.
We're going to go and say select star
from sales customers. This is our first
table. So we are using the alias of C.
So let's go and execute it. Now as you
can see we got the list of all
customers. So that we have all the
details for our customers. But now we
have to go and join it with the orders.
So in order to do that let's have a new
line. left join
sales sales orders and let's have the
lso and now we have to go and define the
key for the join so on it's going to be
the customer ID equal the customer ID in
the order table so now if you go and
execute it now what we're going to do
we're going to go and show the order ID
from the table orders so order ID just
to see whether we have a match or not so
let's have it like this and execute it
Now let's go and check the results. As
you can see those four columns comes
from the table customers and only the
last column come from the orders. So now
what is interesting is to check the
order ID whether we have nulls or not.
So as you can see for the customer one
we have everything matching. For the
customer two as well we have orders the
three as well for only the last one
customer ID 5 we have here a null. So
that means SQL was not able to find any
order for this customer. So again what
this means we have only one customer
Anna where she doesn't have any order
but all other customers they did have an
order and that's because we have values
from the right table. So once we have
values that means we have matching but
since here we have a null that means we
don't have any matching. So now since
the left anti- joint says we would like
to have all the data from the left table
without having any matching from the
right table. So that means for this
example we would like to get only this
customer Anna. And this is exactly as
well fulfilling our task. The task says
list all details for customers who have
not placed any order. All data from
customers where we don't have matching
from the orders. Now I think you already
got it how to get this effect. We're
going to go and filter the data like the
following. So we're going to have the
wear clause and now we need the column
from the right table from the orders. So
we're going to go with the customer ID
comes from the orders. So we're going to
say oh customer ID is null. And of
course you can go with the order ID as
well. You're going to get the same
effect. But I would like always to use
the key that we are using with the join.
So let's go and execute it. And now as
you can see we got the effect of the
left anti join and with that as you can
see we got the customer that we are
aiming for. So here we have the data
from the left side that is not matching
the right side. So the customers who
have not placed an order and with that
we have solved the task. So as you can
see we have implemented the left and
join by combining the left join together
with the is null. So this is the power
of playing with the nulls in SQL.
Now my friends, there is something that
is really confuses a lot of developers
or anyone that is working with data in
databases and SQL and that is the
differences between nulls, empty string
and blank spaces. So the nulls as we
learned we are saying I don't know what
the value is it is unknown. But now in
the other hand the empty string you are
saying I know the value it is nothing.
So the empty string is a string value
which has a zero characters. This is
totally different than the nulls. The
nulls we don't know anything about it.
So now sometimes maybe happens to you as
you are filling a forum and you come to
one field you go and by mistake hit a
space bar and with that you are entering
space into the field and you just jump
to the next field without entering any
other values. So we have now like a
space character inside the field. This
is really evil in databases because once
the user enter a blank space, it's going
to go and store it as a value inside the
database and it's going to take storage.
So it could be one space or many spaces
depends on how long you press the space
bar. So the blank space is a string but
the size is not zero like the empty
string. We're going to have a size of
how many spaces you have entered. So
here it's not like the null. We know the
value it is string and the character of
that going to be space. Okay. So let's
see those three scenarios inside scale.
Now I have like a dummy data using the
city statements. Don't worry about it.
I'm going to teach you all those stuff
in the next tutorials. So now we have
here like four rows. The first one with
a value a. The next one with null. The
third one with empty string. So as you
can see there is nothing between those
two quotes. And the last one we have a
space between those two quotes. Now
let's go and query this temporal table.
So select star from orders and execute.
So now by looking to the values of the
categories you can find all the
scenarios now. So now the first scenario
is the easiest one where we have a
normal value. We have here an a. But the
other three rows we don't have normal
values. We have like empty stuff. So the
first one going to be the null. So we
don't have a value. This is the special
marker from SQL. It says null. So there
is no value. And the other two they are
really confusing. As you can see it's
really hard by just looking to the data
or to the results whether it is an empty
string or a blank space. And this confus
a lot of developers or anyone working
with data seeing those results. It's
really hard to detect the data quality
issues by just looking at the results.
So now in this scenario what I do I go
and calculate the length of each value
inside my column. So let's go and do
that. Now we're going to go in the SQL
server. We're going to go and use the
function data length and our field going
to be the category. So let's call it
category length. So let's go execute it.
And now let's check the result. The
first one since we have only one
character, the length of that is going
to be one which is correct. And now to
the next row we have the category null.
We don't know the value and as well we
don't know the length of the value,
right? So that's why we will get a null.
So now by moving to the next one as you
can see those two looking really exactly
the same. But now with the help of the
length or the data length function we
can see that the third row or the third
category value has the length of zero.
That means it is an empty string and we
don't have any characters over here that
is hidden. So with that we are sure this
is an empty string. But now let's move
to the last one. Here it is very tricky
and evil. we have a hidden space inside
this value and we can understand that by
the length of this field. So as you can
see we have here a one that means we
have here one hidden space inside this
value and it is not empty string. So
that means I have here only one space
let's go and give it another space and
calculate the length. So as you can see
we have two spaces and that's why the
length is two. So don't count on your
eyes in order to understand the spaces.
go and calculate the length in order to
be very precise. So now let's go and
compare the three scenarios side by
side. So let's start with the first one
about the representations in the table.
The null we're going to see it as a null
inside the table. The empty string going
to be like two quotes and nothing
between them. And the blank space it's
as well two quotes and between them one
or many spaces. And now if you are
talking about the meaning the null means
unknown. We don't know the value. The
empty string it is known but it is
nothing it is empty value. And the third
one blank spaces it is as well known and
the spaces are the value. And now if you
are talking about the data types since
the null is no value. So we don't have a
data type for this and it is like a
special marker in the SQL. And now the
empty string has a data type. It is a
string and the size of this string going
to be zero since we have zero characters
inside the empty string. Moving on to
the blank spaces, it is a string since a
space is a character and it's going to
be the size of one or many. And now if
we are talking about the storage, the
null is the best. They don't consume or
occupy a lot of storage. While the empty
string and the blank spaces, they occupy
here storage and memory and they waste
the space. So if you are worried about
the storage, the best option here is a
null. Now talking about the performance,
you will get the best performance if you
are using nulls. Now the empty string is
as well fast but it is not that fast
like the nulls. Now the worst option
here is the blank spaces it is slow. So
again if the speed is important for you
you have to have those scenarios as a
null. So now if you are talking about
the comparison and you are searching for
those values if you want to search for
the null you have to go and use is null.
But in the other hand if you want to
search for the empty string and the
blank spaces you have to go and use the
operator equal. So that's all those are
the main differences between the null
empty string and blank spaces.
Now you might ask you know what why do I
have to understand the differences
between all those stuff the nulls empty
strings and the blanks everything's like
empty so why do I care well in new
projects I'm going to promise you that
you will be working with sources and
data that has bad data quality and you
might encounter all those three
scenarios in your data and now if you
don't do any data preparations like
cleaning up the data handling those
three scenarios and bringing standards
to your data and you jump immediately to
the analyzes without doing all those
stuff, you will end up providing
inaccurate results in your reports and
analyzes which leads to wrong decisions.
So preparing your data before doing any
analyszis by cleaning up the data,
handling those three scenarios and as
well bringing standards is very
important step before doing any
analyszis. So this is how we're going to
do it together with the stakeholders and
the users of your reports and analyzes.
You have to define a clear data
policies. It's like rules and you have
to commit yourself during the
implementations by following those
rules. And here we have three different
options. The first one you can go and
define the data policies like this. Only
use nulls and empty string but avoid
using blank spaces. In my project I
cannot imagine that there is a scenario
where we need blank spaces. They are
just evil. Just go get rid of them. All
right. Right. So with this policy, we
have to go and get rid of all blank
spaces inside our data. And in order to
do that, we have a wonderful function in
SQL called trim. The trim function in
SQL going to go and remove the spaces
from a string from the left side and as
well from the right side. So all the
leading spaces and the trailing spaces
going to be removed. So now if we go and
apply the trim function on that
category, what's going to happen? All
the blank spaces going to be removed and
it going to be turned into empty string.
So let's go and do that. It's very
simple. So we're going to use the trim
function and we're going to apply it on
the
category. Let's go and call it policy
one. So let's go and execute it. So now
by just comparing the policy one with
the category. You see like it's
identical but it's not. Now in order to
have a better feeling about this we can
go and test it using the data length.
Now let's go again and use the data
length function. So we're going to use
it for the whole results and as well I'm
going to go and use it for the category
in order to just compare it. So without
the
trim so like this. Let's go and execute
it. Now if you go and check the result
as you can see here again we have the
length of two because here we have two
spaces but with the policy one we have
zero. So those two values after applying
the trim function they have the length
of zero and with that we don't have
blank spaces. So that means now we are
sure after applying the trim we have
either a null or empty string. So let me
just get rid of all those informations.
Now I am sure both of them are empty
string. So as you can see it's very
simple using only one SQL function you
are cleaning up the data and bringing
standards. All right moving on to the
option two. You can define your data
policies like this. Only use nulls and
avoid both empty strings and as well
blank spaces. So that means in our
business we don't have anything
meaningful for the empty string and the
blank spaces. We can go and use only the
nulls. Okay. So now let's go and
implement this rule. We have to go and
convert a value to a null. So the value
going to be empty string to a null. And
as we learned we can go and use the null
if function in order to get nulls
instead of values. So let's go and apply
this policy. But now here we have two
values the empty string and spaces. Now
instead of having two rules for that I'm
going to convert first the blank spaces
to an empty string like we have done
here. So I'm going to take the result of
this function first as a first step and
afterwards we're going to go and use the
null if. So we're going to say null if
for the result of the trim if if you
find any empty strings convert it to
null. So that's it policy 2. So as you
can see in the result we have converted
those empty spaces and planks to a null.
So with that we are getting three nulls
and of course we're going to get the
value a. And now if you compare those
three columns side by side you're going
to see the bully C2 is really easier to
understand compared to the previous
ones. Right? So now if you compare the
policy two now to the policy one, you
can see it's easier to understand and
it's easier as well to handle. So again
it's very easy to do data cleanup with
only two functions we have now like
standards inside our data. And now
moving on to the last option, we can
define our data policy like this. Use
only a default value unknown and avoid
using anything else like nulls, empty
strings and blank spaces. So that means
in the analyzes and reports we want to
see the value unknown and we have to
handle all those three informations and
convert them to unknown. So now in order
to implement the policy three we have to
go and convert a null with a value a
default value and here we have two
options either use the is null or we can
go and use the kalis and I will go with
the kowalis so
kowalis and I'm going to use directly
the category. So if you find any null
replace it with the default value
unknown and let's call it policy 3. So
let's go and execute it. So now if you
check the result over here you see that
we got it only once correct. So we
replaced the null with the unknown but
we still have like empty spaces and
blanks and that's because we rushed
using the qualis and we skipped the
other steps. So as you can see preparing
the data you have to do it slowly step
by step. So first we have to go and
convert everything to a null like the
policy 2. And after that the last step
we're going to go and use the default
value. So that means instead of using
the category we have to go and get the
result of the policy 2. So let's go and
copy it and replace the category with
those two steps and let's go and execute
it. So now as you can see we have the
default value for all those three
scenarios. First we have to trim the
data in order to remove all the blank
spaces. The second step, we're going to
go and replace all the empty strings
with a null. And with that, we're going
to get a null for all those three
scenarios. And finally, we're going to
go and replace the nulls with a default
value, the unknown. So, that's it for
the three policies. And this is the
different ways in order to clean up the
data and bring standards before doing
analyszis. And now you might ask me,
okay, which one should I use in my
project? Like if I want to suggest
something for the users, which one
should I use? Well, it really depends on
the business, but I tried always to
avoid this one, the policy one, because
it's always confusing and I have always
explained for the users. So now we are
left with the two and three. Well, I use
both of them in different scenarios. I
normally go with the policy 2 because it
takes less storage and as well the
performance of your queries afterward
going to be really good. So if I'm doing
data preparations in my ETL before
inserting it inside a table, I go with
the policy too. But in other hand, if
I'm doing a preparation step before
showing it in a report like in Tableau
or PowerBI. So if it is like one of the
last steps before showing the data to
the users, I go with the policy 3
because if you present a null inside a
report, it's going to be really hard to
read. So having like a word like
unknown, it's easier to understand.
Okay, we have here missing data. So
again if the data preparations is
exactly before I present the data to the
users I go with the policy 3 where I use
default values but if I'm using a data
preparations before inserting it in the
database I go with the policy 2 because
it's going to optimize the storage and
it's going to be really bad if you go
with the policy 3 because it's really
bad to store the whole world each time
there is no value like the unknown. it's
gonna take a lot of space and as well
you're going to get bad performance as
you are building the queries. That's why
I tend to store the data using nulls. If
you present it to the users go and show
it as a default value. So as you can see
it's very important to understand the
differences between the nulls empty
strings and blanks and how to prepare
the data by cleaning up the data and
bringing standards and policies before
doing any analyszis. So with this we
have cleared up the confusion between
those scenarios and if you encounter it
in your projects you know how to deal
with
it. All right. So now let's have quick
summary about the nulls. Nulls are
special markers in SQL in order to say
there is no value. It is missing. It is
unknown. So nulls are not equal to zero
or empty string or any blank spaces. And
using nulls inside our database is going
to save some storage and as well provide
a strong performance in your queries.
And in scale we have different functions
in order to handle the nulls. So now if
you want to replace a null with the
value we can go either with the function
kowalis or is null or if you want to do
the opposite where you want to replace a
value with null you can go use the
function null if or in other cases we
want only to check whether there is
nulls or not we can use the is null or
is not null. And we have learned as well
that we have to treat the nulls
especially before doing any tasks. So
that means we have to handle the nulls
before doing for example data
aggregations like average, sum, max, min
and so on. And we have to handle the
nulls as well before doing any
mathematical operations like using the
plus operator to concatenate two
strings. And in some scenarios as we
learned we have to handle the nulls as
well before doing joins. And in other
cases we have as well to handle the
nulls before sorting the data. And we
have learned as well by combining the
joins and the isnull we introduce new
types of joins like as we learned the
left anti- join and the right anti-join
where we exclude the matching rows using
the isnull and we can use the null
functions in order to provide standards
and data policies in our data like using
the nulls or using a default values like
the unknown. All right my friends. So
with that you have learned how to handle
the nulls inside your data and now we're
going to move to a very special topic
called the case statements. This is very
important tool in order to do data
transformations. So let's
go case statements. It can allow you to
build a conditional logic in your SQL
query by evaluating a list of conditions
one by one and return a value when the
first condition is met. So now let's
understand the syntax of the case
statements and what this
means. Okay. So now let's see the syntax
step by step. It start with the keyword
case. This case indicates now we are
starting a logic a conditional logic in
SQL. It's like programming languages as
you start with the if else. So the if is
the keyword of a logic and the whole
logic as well ends with another keyword
called end. So once SQL sees the end. So
this is the end of the conditional
logic. So the case is the start and the
end is the end. So now what we're going
to have in between is the conditional
logics right. So the conditional logic
start with the keyword when. Now we are
telling SQL we have a condition to be
evaluated and then we're going to go and
specify that conditional logic. So now
we have to tell SQL what can happen if
this condition is fulfilled. So now we
have to use another keyword called then.
So now we are telling SQL show this
results if the condition is true. So as
you can see it's very simple. It's like
the natural language, right? It's like
in English when the condition one is met
then show the results. It's very logic,
right? And now of course we can go and
add a second condition inside our case
statements. So we're going to have the
same setup. When condition two if this
is true then show the result number two.
We specify the keyword when then we have
a second condition. And if this
condition is true then we tell SQL to
show another results. And of course it's
very important to understand in the
syntax of that SQL going to go and
process the conditions from the top to
the bottom. So the first most important
condition should be at the start. So SQL
going to first check this condition. If
it fails and it's not true then it going
to go and jump to the second condition.
So the order of the conditions is very
important in your logic. And now of
course we can go and add multiple
conditions depend on the logic using the
keyword when. And now once we are done
defining all the conditions we can go
and specify an else keyword. The else
can introduce the default value and it
is optional. You can go and skip it. So
the value of the else or the default
going to be used only if all the
condition failed. So that means all our
conditions are not true and nothing is
fulfilled then SQL going to go and use
the value from the else. So it is the
default value that's going to be used if
all conditions are false. So those are
the keywords that you must use inside
each case statement. So we have case
when then and only the else is an
optional. So you can go and use it or
skip it. So this is the main structure
and the syntax of each case
statement. Now let's have a very simple
example in order to understand how SQL
execute the case statements behind the
scenes. All right, let's have this very
simple example where we have only one
condition. So as you can see in the
syntax, it starts with case and end and
then we have only one condition and we
are evaluating here the sales. So the
condition says if the sales is higher
than 50 then show as a result the value
of high. So it's very simple only one
condition and on the right side we have
here a flowchart in order to understand
how the logic is executed. And now what
we're going to do, we're going to go and
evaluate those four sales through this
logic and see what the output going to
be with the case statement. So let's do
it one by one. Let's start with the
first sales. It is 60. So here we're
going to go and check is 60 higher than
50. Well, yes. That means this sales is
meeting this condition and we will get
true and we're going to get in the
output the value of high. So here we're
going to get the value high in the
output. So that means the first sales is
fulfilling the requirement the condition
and SQL going to give us the value from
this condition. All right. So now SQL
going to go to the next value and we're
going to start evaluating the 30. Now
we're going to ask the same question the
same condition is 30 higher than 50.
Well no. So that means in the output for
this condition we will get false. So we
will take the path of the false. Now if
you take the path of the false we will
not get any value. Right? So that means
the output going to be a null. So the
output for the 30 is null. And that's
because we didn't define in our logic
anything about the default option. So we
don't have here an else. And this is
what going to happen. If you don't use
else, you will get a null in the output
for the case statement. So now let's
move to the next one. It's going to be
the same thing. So 15 is smaller than
50. So it's not fulfilling the
condition. And as well we're going to
get a null. And for the last one since
it's null we will get as well a null
since it will not fulfill the condition.
So now after evaluating all those sales
only the first sales is fulfilling that
condition and that's why we have only
one value the high. All right. So now
let's keep moving and adding stuff to
our case statements. Now we are adding a
second condition. So it says after
checking the sales whether it's higher
than 50 and it fails check again the
sales whether it's higher than 20. If
yes then show the value of medium. So
now in our workflow we are adding a
second condition to be checked if the
first one is false. So now let's go and
evaluate our sales again and check the
output the first one the 60. So as you
can see the 60 is higher than 50. So we
are fulfilling the first requirement
that's why we will get the value of
high. So it's same like before. So here
we're going to get high in the output.
And now here very important to
understand one thing is that SQL didn't
evaluate here in this scenario the
second condition. So SQL didn't waste
any time by checking the other
condition. It skipped everything once it
get a true from one condition. So this
is exactly how SQL process the case win.
It going to check each conditions from
top to down and once it finds a true
it's going to stop everything
immediately and throw the value from
this condition and it will not evaluate
any other conditions. So now it's going
to go and jump to the next value. We are
at the value of 30. So let's evaluate
the conditions. Is 30 higher than 50?
Well, it's not. So it's false. So now
what can happen is going to go and jump
to the next condition and start
evaluating the second one whether it's
true or false. So now we're going to
check here. Is 30 higher than 20? Well,
yes. So it's going to be fulfilled and
we will get the value of medium. So it's
going to stop everything and show in the
output for this value the medium. So
we're going to get medium here. So in
this scenario, we have evaluated both of
the conditions that we have in the case
statement. Now it's going to go to the
third one. We have 15. Is 15 higher than
50? Will no. So we will get to false for
the first condition. Then it's going to
go and jump to the second condition and
check it. Is 15 higher than 20? Will as
well no. So now what going to happen?
The false going to be activated over
here. And we will not get any value as a
return. So we will get the value of null
in the output. And now for the last one
we have null. We will get as well null
because it will not fulfill any of those
conditions and that's because we didn't
define an else in the case statement. So
if we define these conditions like this,
we will get the category medium for the
30. And this is how SQL evaluate
multiple conditions in the case
statement. All right. Now we're going to
go to the final form of our case
statements and we're going to go and add
an else. So we're going to have a
default value. So we are seeing here if
the sales is not higher than 50 or
higher than 20 then show a default value
as low. So that means any sales that is
equal or smaller than 20 going to get
the value of low. And now very
interesting if you check the workflow
over here you can see that we have now a
value for each path. So for the first
condition we're going to get high for
the second one medium. And if nothing is
fulfilled we're going to get always the
value of low. So there is no way in this
chart to get any nulls. Right? So let's
go and evaluate again our values. I
think you already get it. The 60 is
fulfilling the first requirement and SQL
going to stop everything immediately and
just show the value of high. So on the
right side over here nothing going to be
evaluated because the first condition is
true. So here in the output we're going
to get the value of high. So nothing
changed like the two previous examples.
Now it's going to go to the next value.
We have the 30. So we're going to
evaluate the first one. It's going to be
false. The next one it's higher than 20.
It is true. And that's why is still
going to show the value of medium. And
this is as well. We had it in the
previous example. So medium. So now
scale going to move to the next one. And
here things going to get interesting. So
the value of 15. We're going to evaluate
the first condition. Is it higher than
50? Well, no. Is it higher than 20?
Well, no. So now we are in scenario
where none of those conditions are true.
So that's why SQL going to go and
execute the else. So if you check our
chart it's going to be false and we will
get the value of low. So in the output
we will not get this time a null because
we have else we will get the value of
low. The same thing now for the null.
Null will not fulfill the first
condition as well the second condition
and that's why we will get as well the
value from the else. So here in the
output we will get as well the value of
low. So now as you can see if you use an
else inside the case statements you will
make sure that there will be no nulls in
the output. So that you have learned the
different options that we have inside
the case statements and how skill
execute the case behind the
scenes. All right friends so now we come
to the part where I'm going to show you
the most useful use cases of the case
statements that I usually use in my
projects. So let's start. The main
purpose of the case statement is to do
data transformations. And data
transformations is very important
process in each data project. And one
very important task in data
transformations is that we can generate
new informations. We can go and create
new columns based on the existing data
that we have in the database using the
case statements and this of course can
help us deriving new informations for
our analyzes without modifying the
source database only for analytics. So
my friends, the main purpose of the case
statement is to do data transformations
by creating and generating new columns.
So now let's start with the first use
case and the most important and famous
one is we use case statement in order to
categorize the data. This means we are
going to group up the data into
different categories based on certain
conditions. And now you might ask why
this use case is important. Well,
classifying and grouping data is
fundamental in data analysis and
reporting because it makes the data
easier to understand and as well to
track. But what's more important, it
going to help us aggregating the data
based on the categories. All right. So
now let's have the following task. And
it says generate a report showing total
sales for each of the following
categories. category high if the sales
is over 50. Category medium if the sales
is between 20 and 50 and low if the
sales is 20 or less and sort the
categories from the highest sales to the
lowest. Okay, so let's do it step by
step. And now before we do any data
aggregations, we have to go and create a
new column called categories because we
don't have it in the database. So now
let's start with very simple select
statements. So select what do we need?
Let's take the order ID, the sales and
that's it for now. So from sales orders
let's go and execute it. And now we have
our 10 orders and we have to go and now
create a new column called categories.
And we're going to do that using the
case statements. So let's take a new
line and we start with case and then
again a new line in order to define the
first condition using the when. So the
first condition is the high where sales
is over 50. So it's very simple. So when
the sales is higher than 50, what can
happen if this is true? We want to show
the value high. So this is the first
condition. And then let's move to the
second one. If the sales is higher than
20, that means it's less than 50 and
higher than 20, then we want to see the
value medium. And now for the last
category, the low, we don't have to go
and create a condition for that because
if those two fails, then that means that
the sales either equal to 20 or less. So
what we're going to do, we're going to
just do a simple else and show the value
low like this. Let me make this a little
bit smaller. Now what is missing in our
case is of course the end. Without it,
you're going to get an error. So end and
let's give it a name
category. So we are ready. Let's go and
execute it. So now let's check randomly
stuff. So as you can see here we have
the sales of 50 it is low which is
correct and then we have here 60 it's
above 50 and we have the category high
and now if you check the order number
six we have the order 50 it's medium
because it is not higher than 50 it is
between 50 and 20. So now as you can see
we have now classified our orders using
the category. Now the next step that
we're going to go and aggregate the
data. So how we going to do that? We
will use a subquery. So let's do it like
this. So we're going to go and select
and of course we're going to group up
the data by the category. So we're going
to go and select that category and we
need the total sales. That means we're
going to go and use the function sum for
the sales and we're going to call it
total sales. So now we have to nest the
queries together. So from this is our
query like this and then we have to
close it and group by. So we are
grouping by the category. Okay. So with
that we are now aggregating the sales by
that category. It's very simple. Let's
go and execute it. So now in the result
we have only three categories. We don't
have the 10 orders because now we are
doing data aggregations. So now the
granularity now on the level of
category. So now we can see the total
sales for the high is 2010. The low we
have 65 and the medium we have 105. And
of course we are not done yet because in
the task it says sort the categories
from the highest sales to the lowest.
That means we have to go and use an
order by statement at the end and we're
going to sort the data by the sales from
the highest to the lowest. That means
descending. So that's it. Let's go and
execute it. And now with that we have
our reports. Now we are showing the
total sales by the categories and the
data is sorted from the highest to the
lowest. So the highest category is high
then medium and then the last one is
low. So my friends as you can see with
the help of the case win we have created
the new informations from our data we
have the category and then we have
created insights or report based on this
new informations where we have
aggregated our data using this new
information. So the use case of
categorizing data using case statements
is fundamental and very important in
each data
project. Okay. Okay. So now one more
thing before we jump to the next use
case is that there is one rule to follow
if you are using case statements and
that is the data types of the result
must be matching. So what this means if
we check again our example over here we
can see that the result of each
condition is a string. So as you can see
we have here high, medium and low and
all of those informations are following
the same data type. So it is correct. So
now if I go and break this rule for
example after this then let's have the
value two. So now we have a number and
we have characters. So let's go and
execute it. And now of course we're
going to get an error because now SSQL
is trying to convert the value low to an
integer which is incorrect. So the data
types of the output of the result must
be matching and that's not only include
the value after the then but also the
value after the else because this value
is as well part of the output. So let's
have here again medium. And now let's go
and change this to let's say one. So
let's go and excuse it again. Isl going
to throw an error because this is an
integer in number and the others are
string characters. So this is the rule
of using the case statement. The data
types after then and after else must be
matching. And if you ask me whether
there is restriction about where you can
use the case statement in which clauses
you can use it everywhere in select, in
joins, from, where, group by, order by,
everywhere. So there are no restrictions
and we have only this one rule.
Okay friends, another use case for the
case statement. We can use it in order
to map values. So we can use the case
statement in order to transform the data
from one form to another in order to
make it more readable and more usable
for analytics. One scenario of mapping
values is that sometimes the database
developers stores the data and values
inside the database as codes and as
flags. So for example, the status of the
order could be stored as one and zero
instead of having inactive and active.
And this is one technique in order to
optimize the performance of the database
for the application because one and zero
is way faster than storing the whole
string. But in data analyzes, we usually
generate a report to be read by human by
persons. And now instead of showing the
data as zero and one, it's going to be
more nicer and readable if you show the
data as active and inactive. So for
these scenarios, we're going to go and
use the case statement in order to
translate those cryptical and technical
values into readable terms. Otherwise,
each one going to consume your report.
Going to ask you what do you mean with
the zero and one. Let's have the
following task and it says retrieve
employee details with gender displayed
as full text. Okay. So now let's go and
solve it. First we're going to go and
explore few informations. So let's go
and show the employee
ID and let's take the first name, last
name and we need the gender
informations. So gender from sales
employees. So that's it. Let's go and
execute it. So now as you can see in the
result we got our five employees and now
the gender informations are stored as
only one character F and M. And of
course it's easy to understand that the
F is female and M is male. but we would
like to show it in the report as a full
text. So, female and male instead of
those abbreviations. So, in order to do
that, we're going to go and use the case
statement in order to do the mapping
between the old value and the new value.
So, let's go and create a new column
using the case. So, we're going to have
here two conditions because we have two
values. Let's start with the first one.
So, we're going to have a new line and
when. So when the gender equals to f
ladies first then female and now for the
second value it's going to be exactly
the same when gender equal to m then
we're going to have male be careful for
the case sensitivity of the values. So
of course we will not end this without
an else. So else then we can have the
default value. We're going to have the
default value not available. It's better
than having nulls. So what we are
missing is the end. So we're going to
have an end over here and we're going to
call you gender full text. So that's it.
Let's go and execute it. Now if you
check the results, we have now done the
mapping between the old format of the
value with the new format. So instead of
m we have males and females. And of
course we don't have here any nulls.
That's why we don't have a not available
in the data. But if you have huge data
of course you can have somewhere a null
and then you will get this default
value. So this is how you can do mapping
between values very easily using the
case statements. Okay let's have another
task for the mapping use case and the
task says retrieve employee details with
abbreviated country code. Sometimes as
we are generating reports maybe using
PowerBI or Tableau we don't have enough
spaces in order to use the full name of
values. So what do we need? We need
abbreviations. we need short form of the
values and we can go and use in SQL the
case statement in order to map the full
value to an abbreviated value. So it's
like the previous example but the way
around. All right. So now let's go and
solve it. We're going to go and select
few details like the customer ID. Let's
take the first name, last name and what
do we need? We need the country
information from sales customers. So
that's it. Let's go and execute it. And
now as you can see we get our five
customers and we have the country
informations as a full name. Now of
course for the report we need
abbreviated values from this. So we're
going to go and map those full names of
the countries to a short form. But in
real project you might get big tables
where you have thousands and millions of
records. So you cannot just check it
like this. So how I usually do it I go
and retrieve a distinct list of all
values from one column. So I usually go
and have a separate query for that. So
we're going to have select distinct
country from the table sales customers.
It's just for me to see all the possible
values inside the database. So now you
see the second result over here. We have
only two values Germany and USA. And
then I can go and map the data
correctly. So always if you are mapping
data using the case win you have to
understand all the possible values that
you have inside the table. So let's go
and generate this new informations.
Let's start with case and then you line
when country equal to the first value.
It's going to be Germany. Make sure you
write it exactly like in the database.
The first character is capital and the
rest is small. So what happened? We're
going to have the abbreviation of
Germany. It's going to be de. All right.
So this is for the first value. And then
let's move to the second one. It's going
to be country equal to USA. It's already
abbreviated but maybe we can get only
two characters.
So us like this. And now let's go and
add an else. It's optional but in case
that we have nulls in the data or we get
a new value. So else it's not available.
So na. So that's it. And never forget
about the end. So end. And the name
going to be country abbreviation. So
that's it. Let me just get rid of the
other query. So the mapping is correct.
Let's go and execute it. And now if you
check the results, we got a new column
called country abbreviation. And as you
can see now the mapping is working. Here
we have Germany and we have here DE and
for the USA we have US. So with that we
have solved the task and we done the
mapping correctly between the old value
and the new
value. All right friends, now there is
special case for the syntax of the case
statements if you are using it for
mapping values. So now let's go and
check it. So now let's say that we have
a lot of different distinct values
inside the country not only to values
you have a lot of values and if you are
mapping the values using the case when
you're going to end up always writing
the same thing country equal Germany
country equal India country equal United
States and so on. So we are always using
the column country. So the conditions
over here using always one column and
it's always the operator is equal. So
now only for this scenario we have
another syntax for the case statements
and it looks like this. We start with
the keyword case but after that
immediately we're going to use the
column that we want to evaluate and here
you can use only one column you cannot
use multiple columns. So now we are
telling SQL we are now evaluating one
column the country and then for each
condition we have the following stuff we
say when Germany that means when country
is equal to Germany then de so as you
can see here we don't have here the
whole condition we have only a possible
value that we can see inside the
country. So we are saying is the value
country if it's true then show de the
next one is it India then en United
States US and so on. So we call this
syntax a quick form of the case
statements and on the left side we call
it full form of the case statements and
of course the restriction and limitation
using the quick format is that you can
use only one column and it's only for
the equal operator. So that means only
for these scenarios you can go and use
the quick format. If things get a little
bit complicated where you have to mix
and make complex logic, you cannot use
the quick formats. So I would say if you
are sure that the logic will not get
complicated and you can stay always with
the same column, you can go with the
quick format. But I would recommend
always to go with the full format
because for one simple reason if you add
one small logic you have to go and
rewrite the whole case statements back
to the full format in order to add any
small logic. But of course there is
nothing wrong using the quick form in
order to do the case statements if the
logic can stay static and you are sure
we are using only one column and we are
just doing mapping. There is no any
extra logic. Okay. So now let's try this
quick format for the case statement for
the previous example. So I will just go
and copy everything to a new column. So
I'm just going to rename it to two. And
now how we going to do it? So it's going
to be case but this time we're going to
write country and then inside the wind
we will have only the values. So no need
for the condition. So it's going to be
like this. Let me scroll up. So that's
it. As you can see it's smaller and
quicker than writing the whole condition
each time. So now let's go and execute
this. And as you can see in the result
we're going to get identical values. So
now you know one more trick in the case
statement.
All right, moving on to the next use
case for the case statements. We can use
it in order to handle nulls. Handling
nulls means replace a null with a value.
And as we learned before with the window
aggregate functions, sometimes nulls
leads to incorrect calculations and
results which leads to wrong decision-m.
We're going to have later a dedicated
chapter on how to handle nulls in SQL.
But now we're going to learn how to
handle nulls using case statements. So
now let's have the following task and it
says find the average scores of
customers and treat nulls as zero and
additionally provide details such as
customer ID and the last name. Okay. So
now let's solve it step by step and
again we have here details and as well
we have to do aggregations that means we
have to go and use the window functions
and we don't have to forget that we have
to treat the null so we have to handle
it. So now let's go and start with very
simple uh select. So select
customer ID we need the last name and as
well we need the scores. So from sales
customers let's go and execute it. So as
usual we have our five customers and the
scores. And here we have a null. Now
we're going to go and write the window
function but without handling the nulls
just in order to see the differences. So
we need the average function for what
for the scores. Do we have to now
partition the data? Well no. So we're
going to leave it as empty. We need the
average score of all customers. So
that's it. Let's go and give it a name
and then execute it. I think I have here
mistake. So it is a score not scores. So
and now as you can see we have the
average of 625. And as you learned
before SQL going to go and summarize all
those four values and divide it by four.
But our business understand the nulls as
zero not as missing information. So we
have to go and handle the null. Let's go
and create a new column for the scores.
But this time we're going to go and use
the case statements. It's going to be
very simple. So we're going to say when
the score is null. So in SQL we don't
write equal null, we say is null. So
with that we are replacing the nulls
with zero. Right? So now otherwise what
can happen? So if it's not null so we
need the score as it is. We should not
manipulate anything. So the default
value is the score itself if the score
is not null. So now let's go and end it
and let's call it score clean. So let's
go and execute it. Now if you check the
result over here, it's like almost
identical as the score. So we don't have
any new values for the scores but only
the nulls now are zero and all other
values they are not affected. So we
didn't touch it. We didn't transform it
at all. So this is what do we mean with
handling nulls replacing nulls with
another value. So now in order to finish
the task we have to do the average for
the score clean and not for the original
score. So how we going to do it? Let's
go and copy the whole case statements.
I'm just going to do it in another
column. So let's have an average and
inside it we have the case statements
like this. Let me just sort it like
this. And now what is missing is the
over and it's going to be empty. So
average customer let's call it clean. So
this is the logic. Let me just make
everything smaller. So now as you can
see it's exactly like the previous one
but instead of using the original score
now we are using the column that we have
created. But of course we don't need the
alias over here. So we have to remove
it. So it start with case and end. So
let's go and execute it. And now you can
see in the output we got a new value for
the average and it is more accurate for
the business. So now we have 500.
Previously we had
625. So as you can see you have to
understand what the nulls means in your
business and handle it correctly.
Otherwise you will get wrong results. So
that's it. We use case statements in
order to handle the nulls inside our
data.
Conditional aggregations means we're
going to go and apply an aggregate
function in SQL like some average count
but this time only on a subset of data
that meet specific conditions. This
technique is amazing in order to do deep
dive analyzes or target analyzes on a
specific subset of the data. So now
let's have the following SQL task in
order to understand this use case. The
task says count how many times each
customer has made an order with sales
greater than 30. All right. So, as
usual, we can do it step by step. So,
what do we need? We need the orders. So,
let's get the order ID and as well,
let's get the customer ID like this and
the sales from sales orders. Let's go
and execute it. So now, what else I'm
going to do with I'm going to go and
order the data by customer ID. So, let's
execute it again. Okay. So, now the task
sounds easy, but it's a little bit
tricky. We have to count the number of
orders for each customer where the sales
is higher than 30. Let's have an
example. For example, this customer
number one. So the total number of
orders is three orders, right? But we
have to count only the orders where the
sales is higher than 30. And in this
example, we have only one order where
the sales is higher than 30. So it's
only the order number four. So the count
for the customer ID number one should be
one. Now let's check another customer.
For example, the two. And as you can
see, we have three orders, but none of
them have the sales higher than 30. So
the count should be zero here. So how we
going to do that? We have to go and flag
each row whether it's higher than 30 or
not. So if it's higher than 30, it gets
the flag of one. If it's less than 30 or
equal to 30, it's going to get zero. And
then we're going to go and summarize all
those flags in order to get the count.
So let's do it step by step. Let's first
create the flag. So we're going to go
and use case and then our condition is
very easy. We're going to say when. So
what is the condition? Sales greater
than 30. So sales is higher than 30.
Then what can happen? We're going to
flag it with the one because later we're
going to go and summarize the one. And
now else if it's not higher than 30,
equal to 30 or less. So it's going to
get zero. All right. So now let's go and
end it. So let's say sales flag. Now
let's go and execute it and check the
results. All right. So now if you check
the results we got now a very nice flag
in order to see which orders has sales
higher than 30. So now for example let's
take the customer ID number one. As you
can see only the order number four has
sales higher than 30 and it's flagged
with one and all others are zero. Now
let's take the customer ID number three.
And as you can see we have now two
orders where the sales is higher than
30. And as you can see we have the one
twice. And now we can use this flag in
order to do the aggregation. So now if
you go and summarize the flag for the
customer id number three we will get two
and this is the count of orders where
the sales is higher than 30 right and
let's take another example the customer
ID number two we have everywhere zero
and if we summarize those values we will
get zero which is the count of orders
where the sales is higher than 30 which
is correct so now as you can see first
we have built an extra column in order
to help us doing the aggregation and now
in the next step we're going to go and
aggregate this column so let's go and do
that we don't need all those
informations the order ID we need the
customer ID because it is the
granularity for the aggregation and
let's remove the order by and now let's
go and group up the data by customer ID
but of course we need the aggregate
function so how we going to do it we're
going to go and summarize the whole flag
so and now of course we're going to go
and rename this since now it is an
aggregated column so we're going to call
it total orders so now let's go and
execute it. So now let's go and check
the result. As you can see, now we have
our four customers. And for the customer
ID number one, we got only one order
higher than 30. The second one has no
orders higher than 30. The third we have
two and one. And with that, we have
solved the task. Now I would like to add
one more thing to our query in order to
see the normal aggregations, not the
conditional aggregations. So usually we
go and count for example the star in
order to get the total orders. And let's
rename the previous one to high sales.
So let's go and execute it. So we are
just now doing aggregations without any
conditions. And now we can see how many
orders did each customer. So we can see
that the customer ID number one did
order three times but only one order
higher than 30. So this is a normal
aggregation and this is a conditional
aggregations using the case
statements. All right friends. So now
let's do a recap about the case
statements. Case statement can go and
evaluate a list of conditions one by one
and return a value once the first
condition is met. And if you are talking
about the rules of using the case
statements, we have only one where the
data types of each condition after the
then and else must be matching. And now
if we talk about the use cases of the
case statements, the main use case is to
do data transformations and especially
by creating new columns and deriving new
informations. So as we saw there are
amazing use cases for the case
statements. For example, we can use it
in order to categorize our data. As we
learned, we can go and create a new
groups of data then to be aggregated for
our reports. And then we saw another use
case is mapping values. We can use the
case statement in order to help us
mapping the cryptical technical values
that is stored in databases to new
values which is more readable and more
friendly to be used. And the next use
case that we have learned is handling
the nulls. We can use the case statement
in order to replace the nulls with value
to make our aggregations more accurate.
And the last use case that we have
learned and I think the most used one in
my project is doing conditional
aggregations where we can aggregate a
subset of data that meets specific
conditions in order to do focus and
target analyszis. Okay my friends. So
with that we have covered all the topics
and all the functions in order to
transform single value in SQL the role
level functions that was very important
especially for data engineers. So we are
done with this chapter. Now we are
moving to very interesting chapter.
Finally we're going to talk about data
analytics in SQL and we will be covering
now the aggregate and the analytical
functions that we have in SQL. So first
we're going to start with the basics. So
we will learn simple functions on how to
aggregate your data. So let's go.
Hey my friends. So now we're going to
talk about the aggregate functions in
SQL. They are amazing if you are a data
analyst or data scientist where we
usually use them in order to uncover
insights about our data. So the
aggregate functions they accept multiple
rows as an input and the output of the
aggregate function usually is one single
value. So now we're going to go and
cover first the basic aggregate
functions in SQL. So let's go. So now in
our database we have four orders and we
have the sales informations for each one
of them. So now one question that comes
in our mind what is the total number of
orders in our business. So how many
orders do we have? Now in order to do
that we use the function count because
what it does it's going to go and count
the number of rows inside our table. So
if you apply the count function on this
data SQL going to go and start counting
how many rows do we have. So the total
number is four and in the output we will
get four. So as you can see we don't
really care about the content of the
tables. Scale is just counting how many
rows. So the number is not based on the
sales or formations or the orders. So
this is how the count function works.
Now we have another question and we say
I would like to find the total sales in
our data in our business. So that means
we have to go and summarize all those
sales that we have in the order and for
that we have the sum function. So if you
go and apply the sum function, it's
going to go and summarize all the sales
and return at the end the total sales.
In this example, it's going to be 80.
So, as you can see, the aggregate
function accept multiple rows, multiple
values, and the output going to be one
single value, the aggregated value. Now,
moving on, I would like to understand
what is the average sales in our
business. So, it sounds simple. In order
to do that, we're going to use the
average function. So, if you apply it on
the sales, it's going to go and
summarize all those values and divide it
by the number of values. So, you will
get the average of 20. Now comes
interesting question where you want to
find what is the highest sales in my
data. So for that we can use the
function max. So once you apply it it's
going to go and start searching for the
highest value inside our table. So this
time we are not really aggregating the
data into something new. It's like
searching for the highest value between
multiple values. So in this example we
will get the 35 as the highest sales.
Now of course if you want to see the
lowest sales inside your business you
can use the min function. And if you go
and apply it as well, the same thing is
going to go and start searching for the
lowest value in the sales. And in this
example, it's going to be the 10. So as
you can see guys, the aggregate
functions is very simple but yet very
powerful. So it is really useful for
insights in order to understand how well
your business is performing. So now
let's go to SQL in order to try those
functions. Okay. So now we're going to
go and analyze the orders table inside
our database by doing very simple
aggregations. So let's start with the
first task. It says find the total
number of orders. So this time we are
targeting the table orders. So let's
just start with the select. So now we
can see we have like four orders. And
now we would like to have like one
number. What we can do? We can go and
say count star as total number of
orders. So let's go and execute it. And
with that we got one number. It is the
four. This is the total number of
orders. Now let's move to the second
task. It says find the total sales of
all orders. So this time we have to
summarize all the sales values in one
big value. So how to do it? We're going
to use the function sum and this time we
are targeting the sales and we're going
to go and call it total sales. So let's
go and execute it. And with that we have
80 as the total number of sales. So all
the sales values are summarized in one
big value. So as you can see now we are
exploring the business right? We are
understanding how many sales, how many
orders. So this is really the basics of
analytics in SQL. Now let's go to the
second task. Let's find the average
sales of all orders. So we're going to
have average this time the sales as
average sales. Again very simple. Let's
go and execute it. Now the total sales
is 80 but the average sales is 20. So
all the values of the sales is
summarized and then divided by the
number of orders. So 80 divided by four.
And with that SQL finding the 20 as an
average. Now let's go and get
interesting stuff. Let's go and find the
highest sales of all orders. So what is
the highest sales that happens in our
business? In order to do that, we can
use the function max sales as highest
sales. Very nice. Let's go and execute.
So the highest sales in the database is
35. And now I think you already know
what is the next task. Find the lowest
sales of all orders. So this is exactly
the opposite. So we're going to go and
use the min sales as lowest sales. So
let's go and execute. The lowest sales
in our business was 10. So my friends,
as you can see, the aggregate functions
are really amazing. And if you use it
like this, you will get like the big
numbers about our business. But now
don't forget about the aggregate
functions. If you combine it with a
group by then you will be breaking those
big numbers into something like you are
aggregating by the customer ID maybe by
a date by a country. So anything you
specify with the group by it going to
breaks those big numbers into smaller
number based on the column that you are
using. For example let's go with the
customer ID over here and let's put it
at the start as well. And now if you go
and execute it. So now as you can see in
the output all those numbers are not
anymore like big numbers. We drill down
to more details based on the column that
we have specified. So now we have for
each customer the total number of
orders, the total number of sales, the
average sales, the highest sales or the
lowest sales. Of course the data is very
small and those numbers can be more
interesting if you have bigger data. So
if you combine the aggregate functions
together with the group by, you will
break those big numbers into more
details based on the column that you are
grouping by. So now what you can do, you
can go and apply those functions as well
for the customers. There we have a score
and you can go and find the average
score, the highest score, the lowest
score and then you can group up the data
by the country for example. So pause the
video and do some aggregations on the
table customers.
[Music]
All right my friends. So with that you
have learned the basics on how to
aggregate your data using SQL. Now we're
going to move to more advanced way on
how to aggregate your data. We will
start talking about the window functions
the analytical functions. So first we're
going to start talking about what is
exactly window functions and we're going
to cover the basics about this topic. So
let's go.
window functions or sometimes we call
them analytical functions. They are very
important functions in SQL. Everyone
must know them especially if you are
doing data analyszis. Each time I write
SQL script in order to do data
analytics, I end up using them. So as
usual, we're going to go and now
understand the concept behind them and
then we're going to start practicing. So
let's
go. Okay guys, so now let's start with
the first question. What are SQL window
functions? They are functions that
allows you to do calculations like
aggregations but on top of subset of
data without losing the level of details
of the rows. So it is something very
similar to the group pi but here we have
special case you don't lose the level of
details. So now in order to understand
the definition let's have a very simple
example. Okay. So now let's understand
how SQL works with the group by clouds.
Let's say that we have the very simple
example. We have four orders. two orders
for the cabs and two order for the
gloves. And let's say that I would like
to see the total sales for each
products. So now if we decided to use
the group by what SQL going to do going
to take the first two orders for the
caps and put it in one row. So in the
output we're going to have only one row
for the caps with the total sales of 40.
And the same thing going to happen for
the gloves. So we're going to take the
two rows of the gloves from the input
and in the output we're going to have
only one row for the gloves. So that
means the number of rows going to be
depending on the number of products we
have on our data. We have two products,
we get two rows. So that means SQL is
really like smashing or squeezing the
results in the output. And this is
exactly what the grouper does to our
data. It aggregate the rows, aggregate
the data into different level of
details. So now on the left side we see
four rows. On the right side we have two
rows and with that we are losing some
details in the results. But still we
have solved the tasks. So now let's see
what going to happen if you use window
function in SQL. Okay. So now we have
the same data and as with the same task
we have to find the total sales for each
product. Now if you use window function
SQL going to do the following. It going
to go and execute each rows individually
from each others. So what going to
happen it start with the first row the
order ID one. In the output we're going
to get as well the same stuff the order
ID one the same row but we will get the
total sales for the caps. So here the
total sales is going to be 10 30 we will
get 40. Then it's going to jump to the
second row and it's going to process it
as well. So in the output we will get
the order ID two the product caps and as
well we have the same aggregation since
we are talking about the same product.
So we will get 40. Then it's going to go
to the third order and here we have the
gloves. So in the output again we have
the order ID 3 the product gloves and
the total sales this time going to be 5
+ 20 so we will get 25 then it goes to
the last row to the order ID number four
in the output we're going to get four
gloves and as well 25. So now we can
notice that if you use the window
function you will not lose the level of
details of your data. So we are doing
something called rowle calculations. So
if in input data we have four orders in
the output we're going to get four
orders and as well we will get our
aggregations correctly. So now if you
compare both of the methods side by side
we can see that we are solving the same
task. So we are finding the total sales
for each products but with the group by
we are smashing squeezing the results
from four orders into two rows one row
for each order. So that means with the
group by the granularity is changing
right in the input the order ID is
controlling the level of details but in
the output of the group by the product
is controlling the level of details. So
we have different granularity but in the
other hand with the window functions we
are still able to do aggregations but we
are not losing the level of details. So
the granularity of the input going to be
the same like the output in the results.
So this is exactly the main difference
between the group eye and the window
function. If you want just to do simple
aggregations, then go with the group by.
But if you care about the level of
details and you need to add more details
to your results, then you can go with
the window function where you can do
aggregations plus having more details.
And now if you go and compare the
functions between the window and the
group by, we can find that both of them
has exactly the same functions for the
aggregations. So we have the count, sum,
average, min, max. And here comes
another difference between the window
and the group by. The group I has only
the aggregate functions. So that's it.
But in the window functions, we have way
more functions to use for analytics. So
for example, we have the ranking
functions. And we have here another
group of functions for the value or we
call it analytical functions. So that
means in the SQL window, we have a lot
of functions. We can cover a lot of
analytical use cases and advanced
complex stuff. But with the group by we,
we have only the aggregate functions
only for simple use cases. So this is
another difference between the group by
and the window. Group by use it if you
have simple analyzes, simple
aggregations, window functions, we're
going to use it for more advanced data
analyszis where we're going to cover a
lot of use cases. All right guys, so now
we're going to have few tasks in order
to understand one thing. Why do we need
scale window functions and why in some
scenarios group is not enough and we
have to use scale window functions. So
let's go. All right. So let's start with
very simple task. It's going to say find
the total sales across all orders. So we
need one value with the total sales.
Let's see how we can do that. First make
sure that you are using the database. So
use sales database in case you have
closed the clients so that we don't get
any errors. So now we're going to start
with the first thing. We're going to go
and select the sales. You're going to
find it in the table sales orders. So
now let's just query the data. And as
you can see we have 10 orders with 10
sales. We didn't aggregate anything yet.
So we have the row data now. So now in
order to solve the task, we're going to
use the function sum. So sum of sales
and we're going to give it new name
total sales. We don't have to use any
group by because we don't have to group
up anything. So that's it. Let's go and
execute that. And as you can see SQL
going to return one value 380. This is
the total sales that we have inside our
data. And this is the highest level of
aggregations. So with that we have
solved the task. We have the total sales
across all orders. We don't have to
group up anything. Let's move to the
next example. Let's say that in the next
task, this time we want to find the
total sales but for each products. So
not for the all orders, for each
products we want to find the total
sales. So this time we don't need only
one value. We need one value for each
product. In order to do that now, we're
going to go and use the group by
function. And we're going to group up by
the product ID. and group up need as
well the dimension in the selection. So
we can do it like this. So that's it.
Let's go and execute the query. Now as
you can see in the results we don't have
one value. We don't have the highest
aggregations. This time we are drilling
down to the next level of details. So
the level of details here is the product
ID. We have one row for each product. So
for the first product we have 140. The
next one 105 and so on. So as you can
see we are now splitting the data at the
level of product ID and we went from 10
orders now in the results we have four
orders and that's because we have four
products. So the number of rows at the
output going to be defined by the
dimension the product ID and with we
have solved the task we have the total
sales for each product. All right guys
so let's keep progressing in our
examples. Now the next one going to be a
little bit advanced where we have the
same aggregation. Find the total sales
for each product. Additionally, provide
details such order ID and the order
date. So, as you can see, we have
already solved the first part. We are
finding the total sales for each
product. Now, we just have to add some
additional informations like the order
ID and the order date. So, let's go over
here and just add it in our select. So,
order ID and let's have the order date.
So, let's go and execute that. Just
going to make it a little bit bigger.
So, let's go. But now as you can see SQL
will not be happy going to throw an
error and says the stuff that you are
adding to your select are not included
in the group by. So as you can see in
the group buy we have only one dimension
or one field called the product ID. But
in our selection we have three
dimensions the order ID, the order date
and the product ID. So there is no
matching between the select and group by
and SQL will not allow it. And now you
might say you know what let's add
everything to the group by. So with that
we're going to get our aggregation and
as well we're going to get our details.
So let's try that. I'm just going to
zoom out a little bit and instead of
having the product ID let's add
everything. So the order ID, order date
and the product ID. So now we have
matching and SQL should not throw any
error. Let's go and execute it. So now
let's check whether we have solved the
task. The task has two parts right. We
have to do the aggregations and to
provide details. So as you can see we
have solved the second part. We have the
details, order ID and order dates. But
now the first part finding the total
sales for each product is destroyed
because if you check the results, we
have the product ID 101. It has the
total sales of 10. But in the third
order, we have it as a 20 for the same
product. So actually the data is not
aggregated and that's because we are
aggregating at different levels and we
have included way more stuff that we
don't need for the aggregations. We are
aggregating at the order ID level. So as
you can see now we are hitting the
limits of group by. We cannot provide
aggregations and as well provide
additional informations from our data.
You have to pick one. That's why we have
to go to the second option where we can
use the window functions. So let's do
that. I'm just going to get rid of the
group by parts and as well all the
fields. Let's back to the root. So now
we have the sum of sales and if execute
this I'm going to get one value. So we
are at the highest level of
aggregations. So now we need to use the
window function. I'm just going to
remove the name. And now we're going to
tell SQL this is a window functions
using over after the aggregations or the
functions tells SQL we are talking about
window functions. So let's just execute
it like this. And with that we got 10
rows and that's because we have 10
orders and for each row we have exactly
the same value. So we have the total
sales of all orders for each row. So as
you can see SQL understands this is a
window function and SQL should not like
group all the data in one row. It should
keep exactly the same rows or same
number of rows like the input. So with
that we have the window function but we
have to split the data by the products.
So now we're going to use the keyword
partition by it's like the group by but
another wording products ID the same
dimension. So with that we have the
total sales by products as a name. So
let's go and execute this. So now as you
can see in the output we still have the
same number of rows. We have 10 orders.
We have 10 rows but the result did
change because now we are aggregating
the data at the level of product ID. In
order to understand the results we have
to add more informations to our select.
So now let's add the same dimension.
It's going to be the product ID. I'm
just going to add it at the front over
here. So let's select. And as you can
see now it makes more sense. We have
those products and they have always the
exact same uh sales. and as well for the
next product and so on. And now here
comes the magic of the window function.
We can add more informations to our
select statement without having any
errors. So now we need additional
informations like the order ID. So we
can go over here and say order ID, order
date, any type of column you can add it
to your select and let's go and execute.
So as you can see now we got the result
even though that those three dimensions
in the select are not part of the window
aggregation. So with that we have solved
the tasks. We have additional
informations. We have the order ID, the
order date and as well the first part of
the task to find the total sales for
each products. So each of those values
are the total sales for each product.
And with that we have solved the tasks
and this is exactly why we need window
functions. In real projects things get
really complicated. You are doing
different tasks in one query. So you are
doing aggregations, you are doing some
other stuff. So just focusing on the
aggregations is not going to be enough.
You have always to add additional
informations to your query. So as you
can see we use group eye to do simple
analyszis but as things get complicated
in the analytics we use the window
functions in order to show the
aggregations and as well add additional
informations. So as you can see we use
group eye to do simple analyszis but as
things get complicated in the analytics
we use the window functions in order to
show the aggregations and as well add
additional informations.
All right everyone. So now we're going
to go and deep dive into the syntax of
the SQL window functions. We're going to
cover everything each part of the syntax
for you to understand how to use them.
So let's go. All right. So let's start
first by understanding the basic
components or the basic parts of each
window syntax. Mainly we have two parts.
The first part going to be the window
function. We have like sum, average and
so on. The second main part is going to
be the over close. And inside the overlo
we have three different parts. The first
one going to be the partition close. The
second order close and the last one we
have the frame close. And those are all
components that you can use inside the
window function. So two main parts
window function and the offer close. And
inside the over we have partition order
and frame. Let's go more in details. So
for example we have the following window
function. So as you can see we have a
lot of stuff going on here. We're going
to understand them step by step
component by component. Let's start from
the left from the first one. So what do
we have over here? We have a function
window function. So what is a window
function? Like here we have the average.
It's like any other function in SQL. You
can use it in order to do calculations
on top of the window. So the first thing
to do or to define in a window is to
define the function of the window. And
as we learned before, we have a long
list of many window functions available
in SQL. And we group them into three
groups. The first one we have the
aggregate functions. So we have the
count, sum, average, max. All those
functions we have them as well for the
group by. So those are used for the
aggregations. The second group of
functions we have the ranking functions.
So we have the row number, rank, entile
and so on. So we can use those groups in
order to give a rank for our data. The
last group we call it value or sometimes
analytics functions. So here we have
very important functions like the lead,
lag, first value and the last value in
order to access a specific value and of
course we're going to go and learn all
of them one by one understanding the
concepts some examples and as well for
you to understand when to use them for
that analyzers. All right so now let's
keep moving understanding the other
parts of the window syntax. Now inside
the function average we have here a
field name or column name called sales.
This called a function expression. It's
like a value, a parameter, argument that
we can pass it to the function. And here
we can use multiple different stuff. For
example, depend of the function of
course. So here it could be empty like
here in the ranking. It doesn't allow to
use an expression. So it should be
always empty. Or we can use a column
like in the example we use the sales. So
we use the column name as an argument or
an expression. For the average we are
finding the average of sales or we could
use a number. So here in the intile we
are allowed only to use numbers or we
could have multiple stuff. For example
in the lead we can have sales then
numbers and so on. So things get
complicated. Don't worry about it. I'm
going to explain that. So here we have
multiple stuff or we can have a whole
conditional logic. So for example here
we have the case win so on inside the
sum. So the whole thing over here holds
an expression for the sum. So as you can
see we can build here a complex logic
and the output of this logic can be
passed to the function sum. So that
means as an expression for the function
we can use different stuff of course
depends whether the function allows it
or not. All right. So now let's have a
quick overview in order to understand
which data types are allowed in the
expressions for those functions. Let's
see the aggregate functions. As you can
see the count function accept any data
type but the others like the sum,
average, min, max, they allow only
numerical data types. All right. So now
let's move to the rank function. The
expressions it's pretty easy. It should
be empty. It doesn't allow any argument
or anything inside those functions. So
as you can see all of them are empty but
only one that accept numerical values
which is the end tile. You have to
define a numeric value. And now moving
on to the last type we have the value
functions. they accept any data types
inside the expressions. So as you can
see each functions has its own
specifications and you have to be
careful which data type you are using in
the expressions. Okay. So now let's keep
moving to the next one. We have a very
important part in the window syntax. So
so far what do we have? We have a
function. We have an expression. It's
like usual stuff. We have done that
before using the group by. Now we have
to tell SQL that we are dealing with the
window function. It's not a normal one.
In order to do that we have to specify
the keyword over. So the second main
part in the syntax is the over clause
and we use it in order to define a
window and inside it we can define
multiple stuff like the partition pie
the order by the frame but all those
stuff are optional. We can skip it and
leave it empty. So the main task of the
over it tells first SQL we are dealing
with the window function here and as
well you can use it in order to define a
window of your data. So now we're going
to go and cover everything inside the
over clause and we're going to start
with the first one the partition
pi. All right. So now we're going to
learn how to define a window inside the
overlaus. The first part that we can
define is the partition pi. So for
example here we have partition pi
category. We have to define the
dimension. It's very similar to the
group by another wording. So the first
part is going to be the partition
clause. What it going to do? It's going
to divide the entire data sets into
groups or you can call it windows
partitions. So here we tell SQL how to
divide our data. And here we have two
options. Let me just show you. So if we
don't use anything so we have it empty.
You see over and partition by is not
used. What going to happen? SQL going to
use the entire data in order to do the
calculations. So the whole data the
entire data going to be counted as one
window. So we are telling SQL don't
divide anything leave it as it is. The
second option that we have is to divide
the data by partition pi. So we define
the window like this partition pi
products for example. So SQL going to go
and divide the entire data into
different windows. For example here two
windows. And here this time the
calculation the sum of sales will not
apply on the entire data set. This time
it going to be applied on the different
windows individually. So we're going to
find the sum of sales for window one
separately from the total sales of
window 2. All right. So now we have this
very simple example. We have here three
fields. The month, product, sales. They
are really easy informations. And now we
have the following SQL window function.
So we have sum of sales and inside the
overlo we are not using anything. So we
are not using partition by. So how SQL
going to define the window. Now SQL
going to say okay I don't have to divide
anything. The entire data set is one
window. So SQL going to go over here and
say the whole thing is one window. So
there is no partitions, there is
nothing. We have only one window. So the
entire data going to be aggregated. So
this is what happen if you don't use
partition pi and you leave the
overclos. The entire data is one window.
All right. So now let's move to the next
example. We don't want to have only one
window. We would like to have multiple
windows. So we have to divide the data
by something. So in the over clause
we're going to define the window like
the following partition by month. So
it's not empty. We are now dividing the
data by the field month. So the values
inside this column going to divide the
data sets. So here we have two months
January and February. So what's going to
do? SQL going to go and divide the data
into two sets. The first window going to
be this one of January. So we have the
first window going to make it smaller
and the second window going to be the
February. So it's going to be two
windows inside our data and the
calculation going to be happening on
each window separately. So here as you
can see we are using the month in order
to divide our data sets into two
windows. One window for January and
another window for the February. So now
let's have a quick overview about the
options that we have with the partition
p. The first option as we learned we can
just skip it. So without partition by
for example here total sales across all
rows and here we don't find anything
inside the SQL. The second option we can
use one field one column for example
partition by product. So we are using
one dimension but we can go and mix
stuff. We can use multiple columns or
multiple dimensions in the partition by
for example here partition by product
and order status. So here with the
partition by we can define a list of
dimensions that could be used in order
to divide our data. So in this example
we are saying find the total sales for
each combination of products and order
status. So those are the different
options on how to work with the
partition pi. So now let's have this
overview again for all functions. The
partition pi for all those functions is
optional. So if you don't use the
partition pi in all those functions you
will not get any errors. So now let's go
back to SQL in order to start practicing
with this clause. Okay. So now we have
the following task. Find the total sales
across all orders. And we have to
provide additional informations like the
order ID and the order date. So let's go
and solve it step by step. First I would
like to provide the details. So I'm
going to select the order ID and the
order dates from the table sales orders.
And next we're going to work with the
aggregations. So we need to find the
total sales across all orders. Again
since we have here details and
aggregations we cannot use group by. We
have to use the window function. So
we're going to go use the function sum
for sales. And now we have to tell SQL
we are working with window functions.
That's why we're going to use the over
close. And now the next step we have to
think about defining the window. So
let's check the task. It says total
sales across all orders. So that means
we don't have to partition or divide the
data sets into like chunks or
partitions. We have to leave it as it is
like the whole data going to be one
window. And that's why we don't use
partition pi inside the definition.
We're going to leave it empty. Let's go
now and give it a name. It's going to be
the total sales. Let's go and execute
this. And now at the results, as you can
see, we have all the orders, all the
details, and as well, we have the total
sales across all orders. So with that,
we have solved the tasks. We have the
total sales and as well some details
about the order. All right. So now let's
move to the next task. It's going to be
very similar. So it says find the total
sales for each product. And we have to
provide additional informations like the
order ID and the order dates. So it's
going to be very similar task but this
time we have to divide the entire data
into windows and that's going to be by
the product. Since we are saying total
sales for each product. So this time we
have to go and divide the data. So we're
going to define the window like this
partition by and we can use the
dimension product ID. Let's go and
execute this. So now you can see in the
total sales we don't have anymore the
total sales of the whole data but they
are divided but in order to understand
the results let's go and include the
product ID in the results. So product ID
and execute. So now by looking to the
results you can see that the data is
divided into four windows. Let's see
them. It's going to be by the product
ID. So this dimension going to be
controlling the partition. So the first
window going to be the product ID 101.
So we have the total sales for this
product 140 and the next window going to
be 102. The third one 104 and the last
window it's going to be only one row the
105 and the total sales of 60. So with
that we have solved the task. We have
the total sales for each product and as
well we have some details. Now I would
like to show you the dynamic of the
window function. We can add multiple
aggregations on multiple levels. Let me
show you what I mean. Let's say we stay
with the same example but we're going to
find the total sales across all orders
and as well the total sales for each
products. So what we can do we can do
the window functions on different levels
by for example here removing the whole
definition. So here we have the total
sales for the entire data for the first
task and the next one going to be the
total sales but divided by the product
ID. Let's here rename it by
products. Let's go and execute this. And
now you know what I'm going to go and
add the sales as well just to explain
the flexibility of the window function.
So let's go add the sales and execute it
again. And now by looking to the results
you can see we have the sales
informations three time but with
different granularities. The first sales
the sales it sales without any
aggregations. It is the highest level of
details of the sales and we're going to
have the sales for each order. The next
one the total sales with the window
function. Here we have the highest level
of aggregation. So we have the total
sales of all orders and the last one the
total sales by product it's something
like in the middle we are aggregating on
a window and the window going to be the
product ID. So as you can see we have
different granularities of the
aggregations and this is exactly the
flexibility that we have with the window
function. We can do all those stuff in
one query. Okay. So now let's keep
moving and adding stuff to our task.
It's going to say find the total sales
for each combination of the products and
the order status. So this time we have
to divide the data not only by the
product as as well with another
dimension the order status. So now let's
see how we can do that. I'm going to
just show the dimension order status and
the results and we're going to add the
following thing. So sum sales over since
it's a window function and let's go now
and define the window partition by. So
we have again the product ID but not
only this dimension as well the order
status and let's go and call it sales by
products and status. Let me just rename
those stuff. Okay. So let's go and
execute. All right. So now let's check
the results. It is the last aggregation
over here. And as you can see here the
aggregation has different granularities
as the previous one. And we have more
details. This time we are splitting the
data by two dimensions. So the first
window going to be the product ID with
the order status it's going to be only
those two rows. So we have the order ID
101 and the order status delivered. So
the total sales of this going to be 10 +
20 and we're going to have 30. The next
window going to be the same product but
with different status. So it's going to
be the 101 shipped and we're going to go
and summarize those two values and we're
going to have 110. The next product and
order status going to be the 102 and we
have it only once. So 102 delivered it's
only once. So it's going to be the same
value. The next partition or window it's
going to be two rows. 102 with the
shipped is going to be those two things
60 + 15 we're going to get 75. So as you
can see here the product ID and the
order status they are controlling how
many windows we're gonna get. So we get
here around like six windows. With the
product ID we got only four windows and
without using anything inside the
overlause we will get only one window.
So this is how the partition by
works. All right. So that was the first
part of the window definition within the
overclo. Let's move to the next part. We
have the order by. For example, we can
use order by order date. It's just a
field. So the order close is very
important in order to sort your data
within a window. So the order by is very
important as well for many functions. So
by just checking the overview over here
for the aggregate functions it is
optional. So you could just leave it or
add it. But for the rank function and as
well for the value functions they are a
must. So if you want to use those
functions you must use the order clause
because it makes no sense for example if
you are ranking the data without sorting
your data first. Okay guys. So now back
to our very simple example and we have
the following query. So the function
this time going to be rank. So we have
to rank the data and the definition of
the window going to be partition by
month. So that means we divide the data
by the months. So we have it over here.
And then the second part going to be
order by sales descending. So we have to
sort each window by descending order.
That means we start with the highest
value and we end up by the lowest value.
So let's see how SQL going to go and
execute this. So first partition by
month. So it's going to divide the data
into two partitions because we have two
values by the month. So let's see how
this going to look like. So one window
for January and another window for
February. All right. So now SQL going to
go to the second part and execute order
by sales descending. So what's going to
happen? SQL going to go for each window
separately and start sorting the data
from the highest to the lowest without
checking the other window. So in those
three values, the highest one is this
one. So it's going to be on top. Let me
just sort it. This is going to be the
lowest. You're going to be in the
middle. So SQL going to sort this window
separately from the next one. And then
once it's done, it's going to go to the
second one. So the highest value going
to be this one. You are the lowest. Let
me just do it like this. So SQL going to
sort it like this. The highest one is
70. The next one is 40. And the last one
is five. So with that SQL done with the
definition of the window. So it's
splitted by the month. And each window
is sorted by the cells. The next step is
going to go and rank those values. So
it's really simple. In the output, it's
going to rank the data like this. So the
first one going to be this value. The
next one going to be two and the third
one going to be three. So as you can
see, SQL is sorting only this window and
it's going to go and repeat the same
stuff for the second window. So each
rank is separately from the others. So
as you can see, it's very simple. This
is how SQL executes partition by
together with the order buy for the rank
function. All right. So now let's have a
quick task for the order by. It says
rank each order based on their sales
from the highest to the lowest. And we
have to provide additional informations
like order ID and order date. So let's
see how we can write the query. So we
have the basic stuff order ID, order
date and sales. And now we're going to
go and rank the data using window
function. So we're going to use the
function rank and then we're going to
tell SQL this is a window function and
inside it we have now to provide the
definition of the window. So now by
checking the task you can see that we
don't have to divide the data. So we
don't have to use partition by we have
just to use rank and with rank we have
to use the order by it is must. So we're
going to use order by the field going to
be the sales and from the highest to the
lowest. So let's just call it rank sales
and let's go and execute this. And as
you can see our results going to be
sorted from the highest to the lowest.
So you can see the sales 90 at the top
and the lowest going to be the 10. And
as well we have a rank. So for the top
rank it's going to be one and the lowest
rank going to be 10. So as you can see
we just quickly create a rank in SQL.
It's very simple. The whole thing is one
window since we are not using partition
pi. And of course if you want to have
ascending so from the lowest to the
highest you can just remove it because
optionally going to be ascending. So
let's go and execute the query. So now
we can see the orders are sorted the way
around. So we start with the lowest and
end up with the highest. And of course
you're going to get the same results if
you go over here and add ascending. So
if you execute you see we got exactly
the same results. So this is how you use
the order by inside the window
definition.
Okay guys, so with that we have covered
the second part of the window
definition. Now we're going to go to the
last part to the most advanced part of
window and we have the following stuff.
So we have rows unbounded proceeding. We
call this frame close or window frame.
So what we are doing over here that we
are defining a subset of rows within
each window that is relevant for the
calculation. Totally understand if this
is confusing at the start or complex. It
was for me as well. So what we're going
to do we're going to deep dive into the
concept in order to understand how this
works and we're going to do it step by
step. So don't worry about it. All
right. So now let's understand what is
going on with the frame close from the
basics. So now if you do aggregations
and you don't use window function you're
going to consider the entire data or
rows inside the table. But what we can
do we can go and divide the data using
partition pi to a window. So for example
here we have window one and window two.
Now if you go and do aggregations all
the rows in the window one going to be
aggregated and then scale going to go to
the window two and aggregate all the
rows. What we can do in scale is that we
can say you know what I don't want all
rows inside the window. I want a subset
of rows inside the window. So what we
are doing over here is that we have
those two windows but we specify a scope
or we specify subset of data from each
window to be involved in the
aggregations. And of course not only
aggregations we can do ranking other
stuff. So I mean calculations. So here
like we have a window inside a window.
So we are defining a scope of rows. Not
all rows should be involved in the
calculation but only specific subset of
data. And we can do that using the frame
clause. So again the partition by you
can use it in order to divide the entire
data set into multiple windows. And now
for the frame close. If you don't want
to consider all the rows within each
window in the calculation, you want to
focus and specify only a subset of data
within each window. Then you going to go
and use the frame close. All right. So
now let's go and understand the syntax
of the frame close. Let's have the
following example. We are saying the
window function is the average of sales
and then we define the window. So we
have the first partition by categories,
order by order dates and then we have
the frame close. It's going to be the
following rows between current row and
unbounded preceding. This is the frame
types and we have two types. We have the
rows and groups. Then we have like
between and range. So the first range
going to be the frame boundary, the
lower value. And here it accepts three
types of keywords like the current row
or number of preceding or the unbounded
preceding. And then we have another
frame boundary. It's going to be the
higher values and it accepts the
following stuff. We can use the current
row in following or unbounded following.
So as you can see we are defining like
boundary or a range from low value to
higher value. So now we have some rules.
We cannot use the frame clause without
order by. So order by must be exist in
the definition in order to use frame
clause. And the second rule it says
lower boundary must be before the higher
boundary. So always we start with the
lower boundary and we end up having the
higher boundary. You cannot switch that.
Okay. So now we have a very simple
example. We have the month and the sales
and the following query. Sum of sales.
This is the window function. And the
definition of the window going to be
order by month. We are not using
partition by just in order to make our
life easier. And the frame close going
to be defined like this. Rows between
current row and the two following. So
now let's see how SQL going to execute
this. The first definition order by
month. As you can see the months are
sorted already. So now SQL going to work
with the frame definition current row
and the two following. So SQL going to
process this row by row. So it's going
to start with the first row and it's
going to be our current row as here in
the SQL. So this is our current row and
we say the range until two rows, two
following rows. So it's going to be
February and March. So that means the
pointer going to be over here for the
two following. So with this we have the
frame boundaries and SQL have the
following scope for the first row. So we
have three rows and the summarization of
those three rows going to be around 70.
So we will get for the first row 70
because the scope is not all rows but
only this subset of data. Okay. So with
that scale is done with the first row
it's going to jump to the second row. So
the pointer going to be the current row
at the February and the second two
following going to be at April. So with
that as you can see we are sliding down
in the subset of data or in the window
and with that we have a new scope a new
subset and the summarization of all
those values going to be 45. So that's
it. I think you get it already. It's
going to go to the next one. The pointer
going to be on March and the two
following going to be on June and it's
going to slide like this. We have those
three rows in the scope and the
summarization of that going to be 105.
So now things gets interesting for the
next row. So the pointer for the current
row going to be April but the two
following going to be like after the end
of the table or something like that. So
as we slide down as you can see the
scope now or the subset of the frame
going to be only two rows and the output
going to be 75. And finally if you go to
the last row it's going to be the
current row and we're going to have only
one row for this subset because the two
following is just outside of the table
and we're going to get the same value as
the summarization. So as you can see
that's it. It's very simple right? So
the frame we use it in order to scope
which rows are involved in the
calculations. So all you have to do is
to define the boundaries of the frame,
the lower and the upper boundary. Let's
see what other options do we have with
the frames. Okay. So here we have the
same example but we redefine the
boundaries of the frame like this. Rows
between current row this is the first
boundary and unbounded following. This
means that we are targeting always the
last record in the window or in the
table. So unbounded following going to
be always static and it's going to be in
this example pointing to June. And now
it's still going to go row by row and
the current row going to be like the
start January and then February. I'm
just going to take this example the
pointer is on February and the subsets
or the frame going to be those four
rows. So it's going to be February,
March, April, June. So it's going to be
four rows and the total aggregation of
that going to be 115. So you can do it
like this. And previously it was like
flexible more flexible it was two
following but this time we have
unbounded following that means always
the boundary going to be the last one.
So as we are moving with the records
over here the boundary is going to be
smaller smaller and like this and the
last one they going to be both in the
same record. So the current record going
to be as well the unbounded following.
Okay let's see the next one. The
definition of the window going to be the
following rows between one proceeding
and the current row. So here is the way
around one proceeding is lower than the
current row. So let's see how SQL going
to execute this. Let's say that we are
currently at March. So this is the
current row and we are saying between
one proceeding. So that means one row
before the current row. So the frame
going to be like this and we have only
two rows. So the value going to be the
summarization of those two rows and it's
going to be 40. So that means we are
always targeting the rows before the
current row. Okay. So now let's keep
going with the other options in order to
understand everything about the frame.
So we redefine like this rows between
unbounded preceding and the current row.
So unbounded preceding going to be the
first row in the table or in the window.
So it's going to be static like this.
It's going to be the first one January.
And let's say that we are at this
current row in March. So the window or
the subset going to look like this.
Those three rows and the total of that
going to be 60. So now as SQL is
proceeding to the next one, it's going
to fix the first boundary. So it's going
to be always pointing to January and the
subset going to be a little bit bigger
until we reach the last one. And with
that we're going to have the subsets the
whole rows. So with that we get really
great flexibility on how to define the
subset and how the subset is shifting
through the window. Okay, so now we are
just having fun. So we are just playing
around with the boundaries. We don't
have always to use the current row. So
we can use for example here in this
definition row is between one proceeding
and one following. So we don't include
at all the current row in the
boundaries. So let's say again our
current row going to be in March. So one
preceding going to be February and one
following going to be April. So with
that our frame going to be the three
rows. And let me get it like this. And
the aggregation of this going to be
around 45. So with that as you can see
the boundary is going to be one
proceeding and one following. So it
should not be always the current row.
All right. So now I think you already
get it. What going to be the last
option? We're going to have everything.
So the definition of the frame going to
be rows between unbounded preceding and
unbounded following. What we're going to
have over here. The unbounded preceding
going to be January and the unbounded
following going to be June. And now the
frame going to be everything all the
rows. And it doesn't matter where are we
with the current row, it's going to be
always a fixed subsets. So it's going to
be always everything. So if we are over
here or February or March, we're going
to be considering all rows and the total
sales of that going to be 135. So we
will get the exact same results for
everything for all rows. So with that I
think it's not that complicated, right?
We just have to provide the boundaries
and then the calculation going to be
depending on the frame on the subset of
data. Okay guys, so now let's go back to
SQL and start practicing in order to
understand how the frame work. So let's
go and define a window like this. So sum
of sales and the window definition like
this. We going to divide the data by
order status and let's say we're going
to sort it by order date. And let's
define a frame like this. rows between
current row and two following. Let's
give it a name total sales. So let's go
and execute it. So now let's look to the
data. You see that SQL going to divide
our results into two sections, two
windows delivered and shipped. And you
can see that the data is sorted by the
order date. So as you can see over here
for example in this status delivered we
can see that 1 of January 10 and so on.
And then the third part we have defined
a frame in each window. So for example,
let's take the first one. So this is the
current row. So we say the frame is
between the current row and the two
following orders. So that means the
scope going to be like this. So 10 + 20
25 it's going to be 55. And now what is
interesting as well to check here is the
last record of each window. So now let's
take this window over here and the last
record going to be number seven. So this
order and let's say this is the current
record. So we set the frame between
current record and the two following.
But since it is the last record of this
window, it will not go and consider the
next two orders because those two orders
are outside of the window and that's why
we have here 30 and SQL doesn't go and
summarize all those value. So we have it
30 and there is nothing after that.
That's why we will get 30. So as you can
see the frame going to be calculated
within one window. So it will not
consider anything outside of the window.
So this is how the frame works within
partitions. So now I would like to show
you as well a few stuff about the
frames. We can use shortcuts but we can
use them only with the proceeding. So
for example let's say I'm going to
change the definition like this to
proceedings and current row. So let's go
and execute it and we will get those
results. So now if you want to check the
results quickly, let's take for example
this order over here and we are always
summarizing the values of the two
previous orders. So that means those
three orders going to be involved in the
frame and the output going to be 55. So
now there is a shortcut for SQL but only
for the proceeding where we can remove
the range. So we can go and remove
everything and we can leave it like this
rows to proceeding and if you go and
execute it we will get exact results. So
this is a quick way or a shortcut on how
to define a window but it only works
with the proceeding. So for example, if
I go over here and say for example
unbounded it's going to work. So we will
get the results between the unbounded
proceeding and the current row. But if
you go over here and you say you know
what let's have the unbounded following
SQL going to say there's an error. And
the same thing if you remove the
unbounded let's say for example one
following SQL will not like it. So you
can use the shortcut only with the
proceeding. And one last thing about the
frames it does there is a default frame.
So if you don't use any frame and you
use order by what can happen SQL going
to use a default frame. So if you check
the result you will notice that for this
window over here those values are not
like the whole values of the sales.
There is like frame there is hidden
frame and the default frame in SQL going
to be like this rows between unbounded
preceding and current row. So this is
the default frame if you use order by.
So now if you go and just execute it you
will see that we will get the exact
results. So be careful once you use
order by with the aggregate functions
there will be a hidden frame or a
default frame like this between the
unbounded proceeding and the current
row. So that means there are three ways
in order to do this scenario framework
between unbounded proceding and current
row. Either write it like this or you
can go and have a shortcut like this.
Let me just execute it. So we'll get the
same result or just remove it
completely. We will get as well the same
results. Now again the hidden frame or
the default frame is only working with
the order by. So if you go for example
here and remove the order by let's see
the results. The whole window will be
aggregated. So again let me just select
it. So you can see that SQL going to
consider all the rows in the
aggregations and we will get the total
sales for the whole window. So there
will be no frame defined only it's going
to be present once you use order by. All
right friends so with the frame closed
we have now covered all the components
on how to define a window inside an
overclo and with that we have covered
everything about the syntax of the
window functions.
Okay guys, so now we're going to go and
understand the rules or let's say the
limitations of window functions. So
let's learn what you are not allowed to
do while using window functions. Okay,
so the first rule that you are allowed
to use the window function only in the
select close and as well in the order by
clause. So here we have again the same
example where we finding the total sales
by the order status. So as you can see
we used the window function in the
select clause and we didn't get any
error right. So now we can go and use it
as well in the order by. So let's say
order by and let's go and copy
everything but not the name in the order
by. So if I go and execute this there
will be no errors and SQL going to allow
it. And as you can see the result didn't
change. So let's go and sort it for
example descending. So I'm going to
write here descending and let's execute.
Now we have the total sales with the
highest values then the lowest values.
So having this rule that we can use it
only in select and order by that means
we cannot use window functions in order
to filter data. So let me show you for
example instead of order by let's have
clause where the total sales let's say
bigger than 100. So let's go and execute
this. And as you can see XQL going to
say no you are not allowed to do that.
You can do that only for select and
order by. We are not allowed to use it
for filtering data using the wear clause
and as well you are not allowed to use
it in the group by. So if I go and do a
group by and as well remove the
condition over here. So if you execute
it you're going to get the same error.
You are not allowed to use the window
function in the group by. So only with
the order by or as well in the select
clause. Okay. So now to the second rule.
You cannot use window functions inside
another window function. So that means
you cannot go and nest window functions
together. Let me show you what I mean
with that. So let's remove the group
pie. Now everything should be working.
Let's take and copy the whole window
function over here and let's just nest
it. So instead of sales, we're going to
have now window function inside another
window function. So as you can see this
is the inner window function and the
rest the outside is the outside window
function. So if I go and execute this
you will see that scale going to tell us
you cannot use the window function in
the context of another window function.
So we cannot do nesting using window
functions. So as you can see this is
another limitation for those functions.
All right moving to the third rule or
let's say an info the window function
will be executed after filtering the
data with the work clause. Let's have an
example. So okay so now let's say that I
would like to have the same
informations. the total sales for each
status but only for two products 101 and
102. So let's go and do that. We're
going to use the wear clause and then
we're going to say product ID in we're
going to specify 101 and 102. So let's
go and execute this. Now you can see we
still have two partitions. So one for
the delivered and one for the shipped
but the total sales is reduced because
we are only focusing on two products and
we filtered the whole data sets. So how
SQL works? First the workflow is going
to be executed and then the window
functions going to be calculated. So
that means first filtering and then
aggregations. Okay guys, now we're going
to move to the last rule to the most
interesting one and it says the
following. You are allowed to use the
window function together with the group
by clause only if you use the same
columns. So let me explain what do I
mean but first some coffee.
Let's have the following task and it
says rank the customers based on their
total sales. So now it sounds really
easy but if you check it you have here
two calculations. The first one you have
to rank the customers and the second
calculation is an aggregation. You have
to find the total sales for each
customers. Okay. So now I'm going to
show you step by step how I usually
solve those tasks. So for now let's
check the total sales. It is an
aggregation right? So we can use the sum
function and this function is available
in both group pi and as well in the
window function. So for now I'm going to
go with the group by and that's because
the task is very simple. We don't have
to show any other details. Right? So
it's all about aggregations. So why not
using the group by and now to the first
part where we have to rank the
customers. We cannot use the rank
function with the group by right. Groupy
uses only aggregations. So here we are
forced to use the window function. So
that means for the rank I'm going to use
window function. For the total sales I'm
going to use a group by. So now let's do
it step by step. So first we have to
find the total sales for each customer
using group by. It's very simple. So I'm
just going to remove all those stuff in
our select statements. We need the
customer ID and then we don't need a
window function over here. And then
after the from we're going to have a
group by customer ID. So now I'm just
grouping the customers and finding the
sum of all sales. Let's go and execute
this. So now as you can see in the
results we have four customers and
that's why we have four rows and as well
we have the total sales. So let's say
the half of the tasks is already solved.
Right now what is missing that we need a
rank. So let's go and build that. The
second step we're going to use the rank
function and we can define a window for
that. So over and inside it will not
partition the data at all because it's
already like grouped up. So what we're
going to do over order by the rank
function always needs an order by don't
worry about it we can talk about it
later. So now we are ranking the data
based on the total sales that means the
sum of sales. So what we're going to do
let's just go and copy this and put it
after the order buy. And now we have to
decide whether ascending or descending.
It's going to be descending. So the
highest sales first and then the lowest
sales. So now as you can see we have now
a rank customers and we have a window
function now together with the group by.
So now let's go and execute this and see
whether SQL going to allow it. So let's
run it and as you can see SQL runs it
and we will get the rank for each
customers. So the customer three has the
highest total sale. Then the customer
number one and the last one going to be
customer number two with the lowest
total sales. All right. So we solve the
tasks. We have now ranked the customers
based on their total sales. So as you
can see SQL allows you to use window
function together with the group by but
only with one rule. Anything that you
are using inside the window function
should be part of the group I. So for
example, we fulfilled the rule because
we are using the sum of sales and the
sum of sales is a part of the group I
right. So now if I go I just break the
rule by not using the sum just using the
sales. So if I just remove the sum and
use only the sales, SQL will not allow
it because the sales is not part of the
group I. So as you can see SQL is very
strict with this. If you want to use
everything in one query without using
like subqueries and so on, you have to
use the exact same columns. So for
example, if I go over here instead of
sales, I use the customer ID. So since
the customer ID is a part of the group
by, SQL can allows it. So be careful
using window function together with the
group by. As long as you are using the
same columns, nothing going to go wrong
and SQL going to allows it. Okay, so now
I'm just going to go and fix this and
let's run it. So now as you can see it's
really easy if you follow those steps.
First build the query using group by. So
don't you think about the window
function just build the group by and
then the next step the last one you go
and define and build the window
function. So with that you can solve
really nice analytical use cases with a
simple one query without having you to
build like some queries and so on. You
can go and use group by together with
the window functions. All right guys so
those are the four rules for the SQL
window functions.
All right friends, so now let's have a
quick recap about the SQL window
functions. Let's start with the
definition. It will go and perform
calculations like aggregations on top of
subset of data without losing the level
of details. So that means we can do
aggregations and at the same time we are
not losing the details. Now, of course,
there is a lot of similarity between the
window function and the group by. But
the main difference is that window
functions are very powerful and dynamic
compared to the group by. We have way
more functions than the group by. Right?
But now if you are doing data analyzes
and you have an advanced use case, then
you have to go and use window function.
It's more suitable for complex and
advanced data analyzes. But in the other
hand if you have a simple question
simple data analyzes then you can go and
use the aggregate functions using the
group by and of course you can go and
use them in the same query in the same
select you can go and mix the group by
together with the window function with
only one rule you have to use the same
columns and of course the first step is
to do the group by and then later you do
the window function in the same query.
And now to the next point about the
window components we have two main
components. The first one is the window
function and the second part is the
window definition using the over close.
And inside the overlo we can define
three things. If you want to divide the
data to create windows you can use the
partition by the second section we have
the order by in order to sort your data.
And the last part you can go and specify
a subset of data like a frame within
each window. Now let's move to the last
part. We have rules for the SQL window
functions. So the first thing is that if
you have two window functions or
multiple window functions, you cannot go
and nest them together. You have to go
and use multiple subqueries. The next
point is that you can use the window
function only in the select and the
order by clause. So for example, you
cannot use the window together with the
wear clause in order to filter the data.
Talking about filtering data, how SQL
going to go and execute the window
function? It's always after SQL filter
the data. All right. So those are the
basic stuff about the SQL window
function. So with that we have learned
the basics about the window functions in
SQL. And next we're going to start
talking about the functions. So the
first group is the window aggregate
functions. And here we're going to learn
how to summarize our data for a specific
group of rows. So let's
go. Okay guys, let's say that in our
data we have the following informations.
We have the months and the sales. Now if
you apply any aggregate functions in SQL
what going to happen SQL going to go
through all rows of the window or the
entire data and start aggregating the
data. So that means in the result in the
output SQL going to give you one single
aggregated value. SQL going to go and
summarize all those values and in the
output you're going to find for example
here the total sales it's going to be
175 or you can use the average or count
the data and so on. So the aggregate
functions going to deliver at the end
one aggregated value for a window or for
the entire data. Okay. So now let's have
a quick overview of the syntax of all
aggregate functions. Most of them follow
the same rule. So first as usual we have
to define the function name. And in this
example we have the average. Then to the
next part we have to define inside it as
well the expression. We cannot leave it
empty. So here we are using the sales
and the second rule for all functions
beside the count. The data type of this
field should be a number. And this of
course makes sense, right? So we cannot
find the average of the first name of
customers or something like that. So we
have to define a number. Then next we
have to define the frame. So we have the
partition pi and it is optional. So you
could use it or leave it depends. And
then the next one we have the order by.
It is as well optional. It is not a must
or required. So you could use it or
leave it. That mean the whole definition
of the window could be empty for the
aggregate functions. Let's have a look
to all functions. So we have the count,
sum, average, min, max. And as you can
see, only the count accepts all data
types as an expression or arguments. All
others require you to have a number as a
data type. And for all functions, the
partition by is optional. The same for
order by and frame. So everything is
optional over here. So now what we're
going to do with that, we're going to go
and deep dive into each of those
functions in order to understand how
they work, what are the use cases, and
of course, we're going to practice in
SQL. So we're going to start with the
first one with the function
count. Okay. So what is the count
function? It's really simple. It's going
to return the number of rows within each
window. So it's going to help you to
understand how many rows do you have
within each subset of data. So now let's
go and understand how SQL works with
this function. All right guys, so now we
have again this very simple example for
the orders and we have the following
informations. We have the products and
sales and now we want to solve very
simple task. How many orders do we have
within each products? So in order to
solve it, we can use the function count
like the following. So we can say count
and then we pass for it an argument or
expression the star. So with that we are
telling SQL go and count how many rows
do we have in our table. But we have a
window definition like this over
partition by products. So now what SQL
going to do? We're going to go and
divide the data sets into two
partitions. We're going to have one
partition for the caps and another one
for the gloves. So with that we have
prepared our data into windows and we
are ready to do aggregations. So how
many rows do we have within each window?
It's going to be three. So for this
window it's going to be three rows and
as well for the next window we have as
well three rows. So we're going to have
three three and three. It's very simple
right guys? We are just finding the
number of rows within each window. But
now with the aggregate functions we have
to be very careful with the null values
for the count star. As you can see over
here we are not specifying anything
about the sales. So we are just saying
find me the number of rows. So that
means SQL will just count the nulls as
one row. So that means if we are using
the star as an argument for the function
count the null will not affect anything.
So whether we have nulls or nots we are
just counting how many rows do we have
inside our data. But in some scenarios,
we should be ignoring the nulls in our
account. For example, let's say that I
would like to count how many sales do we
have within each product. That means if
we have nulls, it should not be counted.
So now in order to achieve this task,
what we're going to do, we're going to
use instead of a star over here, we're
going to have the filled sales. So now
with this, we are telling SQL, don't
just count blindly how many rows do we
have within each window. You should be
very careful with the values. Find how
many cells do we have within each
window. So now let's see what's going to
happen. For the first window we have
three cells. So we have three values. So
the number of rows is correct. But for
the next one, how many cells do we have?
We have two. So we have this sale and
then the 70. But the last one is null.
So it will not be counted. It will be
ignored. That's why we're going to get
in the output the value two. We have two
sales. So as you can see the result did
change and we are now more sensitive to
the null values. So be careful what you
are specifying for the count. If you are
using a column name like this it will
ignore the nulls. But if you have a star
it just going to go and find how many
rows do we have within each partition.
Okay. So now if you go and compare the
results side by side you can see that if
you specify a column within the count
function it's going to be sensitive with
the nulls. So it's going to ignore it
and will not use it within the
aggregations. That's why we have here
only two rows. But if you go and use the
star within the count function, what
going to happen? SQL just going to go
and count it. So we're going to find the
number of rows that we have inside our
table. And there is one more way in
order to do the same thing here on the
left side. You can use instead of star
you can use one. So you might find it
somewhere that people are using count
one and then the same window function
and we will get exactly the same result.
So the nulls will be counted and will
not be ignored. So now you might ask me
which one should I use the one or the
star? Well, I would say it doesn't
matter right we are getting the same
results and if you are thinking about
the performance I hardly find any
differences between them so you can go
and try both of them and stick with the
one that is giving you like more better
performance. Now we have special case
for the count function compared to all
other aggregate functions it allows any
data type. So that means we can use
numbers we can use characters dates and
so on. So that means we can go and
specify something like the product for
the count instead of sales. So we can go
over here and say product and it's going
to go and count how many rows do we have
for the product. So it's going to be
three over here. And since here we don't
have any nulls, it's going to go and
count it like this. So we have three
rows and be careful here. We are not
counting the unique rows. We are just
counting the rows that we have inside
our data. So this will not be counted as
one and this as well would not be one.
So we have three times the caps. That's
why we have here three. Okay. Okay. So
now we have this very simple example.
Find the total number of orders. This is
very simple task in order to find how
many rows, how many records do we have
inside the table orders. So let's go and
solve it. So let's start by selecting
just star from the table orders without
anything like this. So as you can see we
have 10 orders. It's very simple. It's
very easy as well. But now let's say
that you have thousands or millions of
rows. You cannot do it like this by just
checking the rows. What you're going to
do? We're going to go and use the
function count. So we can go over here
and say counts star and then let's give
it a name total orders. So let's go and
execute it. So now as you can see we got
only one record, one value. We don't see
any other details. We got the 10 orders.
So this is the total number of orders.
This is very helpful in order to
understand the content of your data. So
this we call it overall analyzes or
let's say having the big numbers about
your business. For example, how many
orders do we have? how many customers,
products, employees and so on. So having
those big numbers going to help us to
track our business to understand how
well we are doing with the orders and
with the customers and so on. So this is
the basics of reporting. Now let's go
and extend our task by saying provide
details such as the order ID and the
order dates. So let's go and do that. So
select order ID, order dates. And now of
course we cannot do it like this. So let
me just execute it. we will get an error
because here we have different level of
details in our select. So in order to
solve this what we going to do we're
going to use the over clause and with
that we are telling SQL this is a window
function. So now let's go and execute
it. So with that you can see with that
we have solved the task we have details
we have the order ID order dates. So
this is the highest level of details
since we have the order ID and as well
we have the highest level of
aggregations. we have the total number
of orders in the entire table orders. So
now let's keep going and add more stuff
to our task. Let's say that we want to
find the total number of orders but for
each customers. So that means this time
we have to go and divide our data by the
customers. So let's go and do that.
We're going to use as well a window
function. So count star over we have to
divide the data using partition by and
we're going to use the field customer
ID. So let's call it orders by customers
and I would like to see as well the
customer informations in the query.
That's why I'm going to go and add it.
All right. So that's all. Let's go and
execute it. Now as we learned before
that SQL first going to go and divide
the data. So that means we have four
customers. We're going to get four
windows. The first window going to be
for the customer ID number one. And as
you can see we have three rows. That's
why we have here three orders. And the
same thing for the customer two. We have
three orders. customer three three
orders but only the last customer the
customer ID number four we have only one
row and one order. So now if you go and
look to the total orders and the orders
by customers you can see now we are not
doing the overall analyzes we are doing
like comparison between different
categories and of course in this example
the category is the customers and with
that we can understand as well the
behavior of our customers. So you can
see that we have three customers that
has exactly the same amount of orders.
So they are very similar but we have one
extreme which is the customer ID number
four. This customer has only one order.
So this is the only customer that has
different behavior than all other
customers. So you see with very simple
query we are able now to analyze our
business and understand the behavior of
our customers. So if you divide the data
by partition by and using count you can
go and now compare stuff together. All
right. So now let's keep moving. Next
we're going to understand the special
cases that we have with the function
count. So now we have this very simple
task. It says find the total number of
customers and additionally we have to
provide all customers details. So I
think it's very easy to solve. What
we're going to do we're going to go and
select star since we need all details
from customers from sales customers. So
let's just have a look. So we have five
customers and the function is count star
over and we don't have to divide the
data since we have to find the total
number of customers for the entire table
and it's going to be total customers. So
nothing new that's it we have five
customers and now as we learned before
if you are passing the star to the count
function what you are telling to escale
is that just go and count how many rows
do we have inside the table customers.
So SQL just going to go and start
counting and going to say we have five
customers, five rows. So it doesn't
matter whether we have nulls inside our
data like in the last name or the score.
It's just going to count the number of
rows. So now let's say that we have the
following task. It's going to say find
the total number of scores for
customers. So what do we need with this
task is to find out how many scores
inside our data. So as you can see we
have around four scores but the last
customer doesn't have any score. So we
have it as a null. So the result should
be four. We cannot go now and use the
star for it because we're going to get
five. We have to go and count the
scores. So let's see how we're going to
do that. We're going to count as well.
But this time the score and the
definition of the window going to be
empty. So total scores and let's go and
execute this. So now we can see in the
results we got four scores which is very
correct because SQL did ignore the null
and SQL now focusing only on one column.
So focusing on those values the nulls
will not be counted. This is really
great in order to check the quality of
your data. So let's say that you are not
expecting any nulls inside your data. So
instead of going manually through the
whole records what you can do you can go
and find the total number of customers
like this and then you can go and count
the total number of scores and you can
see there is a difference. So by just
checking the data I can say you know
what we have one null without checking
every record in our data. So with that
we can check the quality of our data and
understand very quickly how many nulls
do we have in the field score and you
can do the same stuff for example for
the first name show it to you. So I'm
just going to go and copy this and let's
say first name or let's say country
actually. So I will go with the country.
So let's go with the country total
countries. So let's go and execute this.
So now if you check the result you can
see we have five rows with the
countries. So SQL going to go and focus
on the countries and it will not find
any nulls. So we have here complete
data. We don't have any nulls because
the total number of customers is equal
to the total number of values within the
country. And I can immediately find okay
the data quality of the country is very
good. All right. So now one more thing
about the count function that we have
learned before. We can use either star
or one in order to count how many rows
do we have. So let's just try it. I'm
just going to go and duplicate it. And
instead of having a star, let's have a
one. Just going to give it a name here.
It's going to be one and you are star.
So let's go and execute it. So now if
you check the output, we got exactly
identical results. So there is no
difference between those two queries.
It's up to you. You can try it and check
the performance. I usually go with the
star instead of one. Okay. So now we're
going to talk about a very important use
case for the SQL window function count
that I frequently use in my real
projects. The data that we use for data
analyzes has usually bad data quality.
And if we don't find those data quality
issues and we don't clean it before
doing the analyzes, what going to
happen? We're going to deliver bad
results, bad analyzes which going to
lead to bad decisions. And one very
common data quality issue that you might
encounter in your project or on your
data is that having duplicates.
Duplicates are really bad for doing data
analyszis. So now in order to discover
or let's say identify the duplicates in
our data, we can go and use the SQL
window function count. So now let's go
and have some examples. Okay. So now the
task says check whether the table orders
contains any duplicate rows. So how we
going to do that? By checking now the
table orders over here. We can see that
there are many orders. But how to find
out the duplicates? Well, the first step
is to understand what is the primary key
of the table orders. So what we usually
do we go and check the data model if
there is one. So for example for this
course we have the following data model
and we can see that it is defined that
the order ID is the primary key for the
orders. The product ID is primary key
for the products. So that means for our
table the orders we have the order ID as
the primary key and it should be unique.
It should not contain any duplicates. So
now let's go to our data and check the
order ID. By just looking at the data
you can see that we don't have any
duplicates. Rightes all of them are
unique. So we have 1 2 3 4 and so on.
But of course in real projects you
cannot do it like this. You have to go
and build a query in order to find out
whether the primary key is unique. But
now you might say the primary keys are
usually unique because we can define it
in the DDL in the rules of building the
table. Well that's true. If you have it
like this then you don't have to find
any duplicates. But usually in data
analyzes we export a lot of files and a
lot of data inside an extra database and
we don't build such a rules. So now in
order to check the quality of the
primary keys that you get from the
source we can use the count function. So
let's go and build it. I'm just going to
select the order ID first as a detail.
And now we're going to do the following.
So count and then star. And let's go and
define the window. So it's going to be
partition by and here the field going to
be the primary key. So the order ID I'm
checking now the quality of this field.
This should not contain any duplicates.
And now we're going to go and give it a
name check primary key. So now my
expectation is that the result of this
should be at maximum one. That means we
have one row for each primary key. And
that means as well it is unique. So if
we get anything more than one then it
means we have duplicates. Let's go and
run the query. And as you can see in the
results we get for each primary key one.
So that's great. That means we don't
have any duplicates inside our data and
the primary key is unique. So that means
the table orders is clean and we don't
have any duplicates inside it. Now let's
check our database. We have here another
table called orders archive. Let's go
and check the table. So first I'm just
going to go and select the data. So
select from orders archive. So sales do
orders archive. Let's check the results.
And here we can see that we have exactly
the same structure as the table orders.
So now let's go and check whether the
data quality is well clean. So now what
we're going to do, we're going to use
exactly the same query as before, but
instead of using the table orders, we're
going to take the orders archive. So
that's it. Let's go and execute it. So
now by checking the data, you can see
that we don't have everywhere one.
Sometimes we have two rows for the same
primary key, which is really bad. So we
have here for the order ID four we have
two orders with the same order ID and as
well for this order id six we have three
orders that means those stuff are
duplicates and they are against our data
model. So now what else we can do is
that to generate a list specifically for
the data quality issue where we have
duplicates. So anything that has one we
are not interested in it. In order to do
that we're going to use the subquery. So
let's say select star from and then
we're going to use the first query as a
subquery and we're going to say in our
filter where the check primary key is
higher than one. So that means I need
only the order ids where we have
duplicates. So let's go and execute
this. Now I have a list with the primary
keys where we have duplicates. So we
have the order ID 4 and as well the
order ID six. So guys, as you can see,
the window count function is wonderful
in order to find data quality issues
like the duplicates. All right guys, so
those are the four most important use
cases in the SQL window function count.
So the first one we can use it in order
to do overall analyzes or we can use it
in order to do category analyzes like we
have done the analyzes on the customer
behavior or another use case we can use
it in order to check the nulls inside
our data. And the last use case we can
use it in order to identify or discover
the data quality issue duplicates in our
data. So now let's go and check the next
function. We have the
[Music]
sum. All right. So now let's understand
what is the sum function. It's very
simple. It's going to return the sum of
all values within each window. So now
let's go and understand how SQL works
with this function. All right. So this
is very easy and we are using the same
simple example and now we would like to
find the total sales for each products.
So we can define like this sum of sales
since we are finding the total sales and
then we define the window like this over
partition by products. So as we learned
SQL going to go first and divide our
data into two windows. So one window for
the caps and another window for the
gloves right. So now after SQL define
the windows it's going to go and starts
aggregating the data. So the sum of
sales that means for the first window we
have the three sales and it's going to
go and just simply summarize all those
values. So we are adding 20 + 10 + 5 and
we will get the result 35. So in the
outputs we will get everywhere 35. So
that's it for the first window and as
you can see SQL going to go aggregate
the data within each window separately.
So that means as we are aggregating the
data for the caps will not check
anything with the gloves. So they are
completely separated. So now it's going
to go for the next window. And here we
have two values and a null. So again
here the null will just be ignored. So
what we going to have? We're going to
have 30 + 70 and the total sales for
that going to be 100. So as you can see
it is very simple, right? So 100 100 and
so guys that's it. It's really simple.
We don't have here like a lot of special
cases like the count function. It's only
that it ignores the null in the
calculation and as well the requirement
here it allows only integers or let's
say numbers. So we cannot go and say sum
the products since the products are not
numbers they are characters. So you can
only use numbers for the sum function.
Let's go now and have some tasks and
some use cases in order to practice in
SQL. find the total sales across all
orders and as well find the total sales
for each product and additionally we
have to provide some details like the
order ID and the order dates. So let's
go and do that. Select order ID, order
date and let's get as well the sales.
And now we have to find the total sales
across all orders. That means we're
going to use the window function sum
sales and the definition of the window
going to be empty since we don't have to
divide the data. So that's it. total
sales and we have to select the table
sales orders. So that's it. Let's go and
execute it. So with that as you can see
we got all the details that we need and
as well the total sales the
summarization of all those sales in one
field. So with that we have our overall
analyzes one big number for our
reporting. We know how much sales we did
made in the entire business. So now
let's go for the next task. It says
total sales for each product. I think
you know already what we're going to do.
So sum of sales and we're going to do it
like this. Partition
by product ID. So that's it. We're going
to call it sales by products. And with
that we are dividing the data by the
product. So let's go and execute it. So
as you can see we don't have the product
information. So let's go and add the
product ID in the query just in order to
analyze the results. So we can see from
the data that the winner is the product
ID 101. So as you can see we have here
the highest sales if you compare it with
the other products and the lowest one
going to be the products ID 105. So as
you can see we can use the window
function sum together with the partition
by in order to compare stuff to do
comparison between the products in order
to understand the performance for
example of the products. So it's really
great analyzes for the performance. All
right. Now we're going to move to very
interesting use case for the aggregate
functions not only for the sum but as
well for the others. It is the
comparison analyzes. Okay. Okay, so
let's understand quickly what is the
comparison use cases. So it's going to
go and compare the current value. For
example, let's say we are currently at
the month of March and the sales is 30.
So we're going to compare this value,
the current sales with an aggregated
value. For example, let's say the total
sales using the sum function. So what
happen if you compare the current value
with the total sales? You are comparing
here or doing analyszis called part to
whole analyszis where it's going to help
us to understand how important was the
sales in this month compared to the
total sales or we can go and compare it
to the best months to the highest value.
For example, the highest value is June
and we can go and compare this month
with the best months of the year or to
the lowest month in the year or we can
go and compare the sales of the current
month with the average in order to
understand are we above the typical
sales or below the average. And this is
very important analysis in order to
study and understand the performance of
the current data. All right, let's have
an example in order to understand the
use case. Find the percentage
contribution of each product sales to
the total sales. So let's go and solve
it step by step. What we're going to do,
we're going to go and let's select the
order ID and as well let's take the
product ID and the sales just like this
from sales orders. So let's go and
execute it. Okay. Okay. So now as you
can see in the results we got the first
part of the equation. We have the sales.
So nothing like a crazy over here. Now
we need the total sales over all data.
So what we're going to do we're going to
have the sum of sales and the definition
going to be empty. So this is the total
sales. Let's go and execute it. So now
we have everything for the equation. We
have the sales and as well the total
sales and that is enough in order to
find the percentage of the contribution.
So the calculation for that is going to
be very simple. We're going to divide
the sales by the total sales. So it's
really simple. Let's go and do that.
It's going to be the sales divided by
the total sales. So we're going to go
and copy the whole window function over
here. And then we're going to multiply
it with 100. So that's it. Let's go and
execute it. So now you notice that in
the output we got zeros. This is because
of the data type. So now if we go to our
table over here on the left side you can
see that the orders has the data type of
integer. So if you divide integers you
will not get a float or decimal number.
You have to go and change the data type.
So now what we're going to do we're
going to go and change the data type for
one of them. So it's enough for the
sales over here. So we're going to use
the following statement. So cast sales
as floats. So that's it. I'm just
converting the integer to floats. So
that's it. Let me just give it a name.
So it's going to be percentage of total.
So that's it. Let's go and execute it.
So now in the output, you can see we got
now the percentage of the total or let's
say percentage of contribution. So now
what we're going to do with that, we're
going to go and round those numbers
because we have a lot of decimals. In
order to do that, we're going to use the
round function like this. Then we're
going to have two decimals. And let's go
and execute it. So now, as you can see,
it is really easier to read because we
have only two decimals. And we can find
immediately that the order rate is the
highest contributor to the total. So
this is what we call part to whole
analyszis where we find the percentage
of total. It is very common analyzes in
order to understand the performance of
each order compared to the total. So
this is an example how the window
function is helping us here to compare
the current value with an aggregated
value. All right everyone. So that's all
for the window function sum. Next we're
going to talk about the average
function.
All right. So now let's understand what
is an average function. As the name
says, it's going to find the average of
values within each window. So now let's
go and understand how SQL works with the
average. All right. So now back to our
very simple example and the task says
find the average sales for each product.
So it's really easy. We're going to use
the average then pass to it the column
sales and we define the window like this
partition by products. So the first
thing that SQL going to go is to define
the window. So it's going to divide our
data into two partitions. One for the
caps and one for the gloves. And now I
hope that everyone knows how to
calculate the average. So as you know
that it's going to go and summarize all
the values and divide it by the number
of rows. So it's going to go and
summarize 20 + 10 + 5 and divide it on
three rows and the output going to be
11. So we're going to get it for each
row. So as you can see SQL just ignored
everything in the next window. We are
focusing only on the caps. Now it's
going to go to the second window and
start doing the same aggregations. But
here we have the special case of null.
So the null is going to be ignored in
the calculations and we're going to have
it like this. It's going to say you know
what 30 + 70 and we are just including
two rows. So it's going to be divided by
two and the average going to be 50. So
we will get the result 50 for each row
and we are completely ignoring the
nulls. But now we might be in scenario
where your users understand the business
like this. If we find a null in the
sales it means a zero. So there is no
sales and it is actually a zero. But we
store it in the database as a null. So
that means the average that we have
provided is not really correct. We have
to divide by three. So that means first
we have to handle the nulls before doing
the aggregations before finding the
average. Now we're going to have a whole
chapter on how to handle nulls in SQL.
What are the different functions? But
for now we're going to go with the
functions qualisk. Okay. So now what
we're going to do, we will not use the
sales as it is. First we're going to
handle the nulls. So that means we're
going to use the qualisk sales and
replace it with zeros. So as you can see
we are not using immediately the sales
we are handling it first and then we're
going to find the average. So SQL going
to go over here and if it finds any null
going to go and replace it with zero and
that's going to have then an effect on
our average over here. So it going to be
30 + 7 + 70 but now plus 0. And now we
have three rows. So instead of dividing
by two, it's going to go and divide it
by three and the total result going to
be like this 33. So that means we're
going to have in the output 33 for each
row and with that we are now fulfilling
the expectation from the business. If
you have a null it's going to be handled
as zero and the result going to be more
accurate. You see right it is very
tricky. If you are doing data analyszis
and aggregations be very careful with
the nulls. understand them, understand
what they mean for the business, handle
them correctly in order to get correct
results in your analysis. So now let's
go back in order to practice SQL using
some tasks and use cases. Okay, so let's
start with the basics. We have the
following task. Find the average sales
across all orders and as well find the
average sales for each product. And
don't forget the details. So now let's
go and solve it step by step. So select
order ID, order date, and let's get the
sales as well. And let's go and find the
average sales. So it's going to be a
window function. And we have the sales
inside it. The usual stuff. The window
going to be empty. So average sales,
we're going to call it the table going
to be sales orders. So that's it. Let's
go and execute it. Oh, we have to select
everything of course. So what SQL did in
the output, it going to go and summarize
all those values and then divide it by
10. So with that we have the average
sales of 38. Very easy. So this is again
what we call an overall analyzis. Let's
move to the next one. Find the average
sales for each products. So again we're
going to go and build the window
function like this. Average sales over
and we're going to divide it by product
ID. And we're going to call it average
sales by products. And we're going to go
and add the product ID in the query. So
that's it. Let's go and execute. And we
missed something here. So it is the
partition by going to execute again. So
with that we have the following data. So
now SQL going to go and divide the data.
So for example for this products we have
those four orders. So what going to
happen is still going to go and
summarize the four values and then
divide it by four. That's why we have
here 35. The same thing for the next
order. It's going to divide it by three.
And the last one is just going to divide
it by one. That's why we have 60. So as
you can see the aggregation can done
separately for each window and this is
as well very nice way in order to
compare the averages between the
different products. Okay. So now let's
have an example in order to learn how to
deal with the nulls. Let's say that we
have the following task. Find the
average scores of customers and show as
well additional informations like the
customer ID and the last name. So let's
go and solve this. We are now targeting
the table customers. So let's just
select it first.
like this. And now let's go and include
the customer ID and the last name. And
let's have as well the score. But this
time we're going to go and find the
average score. So it's going to be the
average score. And since we don't
partition the data, we're going to leave
the definition like this and it's going
to be the average score. So that's it.
Let's go and execute it. So now as you
can see, we have the average score of
625. SQL is going to go and summarize
the four values and divide it by four.
But here we have a null. So now we have
to understand the business or ask about
it what the null means in the scores of
the customers. Is it zero or is it
something empty? If it's zero then the
average that we have is wrong because it
should be divided by five and not four.
So let's say it's zero that means we
have to go and handle the nulls. So what
we're going to do now we're going to go
and use the function kalis. So qualis
and for the score and replace the null
with zero. So you are the customer
score. Let's go and execute this. So now
as you can see if there is a value it's
going to be exactly the same value but
only if we have null it's going to be
replaced with zero. So now let's go and
correct the average. I'm just going to
do it like this. So let's go and copy
the whole thing. But now instead of
using the score we're going to use the
score that is handled with nulls. So I'm
just going to go and replace it like
this. So here without nulls. So let's go
and execute it. So now as you can see we
are getting more valid result at the
output compared to the previous one. And
this is only for the case if the null
means zero. So guys as you see be very
careful with the nulls especially if you
are doing aggregations and handle it
correctly before doing any aggregations
like the average. All right. Moving on
to the last use case. We have the
comparison analyzes and the task says
find all orders where the sales are
higher than the average sales across all
orders. So that means we have to go and
compare the current sales with the
aggregated value and this time the
average of sales. So now let's go and do
it step by step. So what we're going to
do we're going to go and select of
course the order ID. What do we need the
let's take the product ID and we need
the current sales. So it's going to be
the sales as it is and that's it for
now. So from sales orders. So that's it.
Let's go and execute it. So now by
checking the result, you can see that we
got the first part of the equation,
right? We have the sales for each order.
Now we need the second part, the average
sales across all orders. In order to do
that, we're going to go and use the
window function average sales and we're
going to use over since across all
orders that means it's going to be
empty. So let's give it a name average
sales. So let's go and execute it. So
now in the output we got the average
sales. So it's going to be 38. So now we
need all the orders that are higher than
the average. So as you can see for
example the order one is not higher but
the order for is higher than the
average. So in order to filter the data
we cannot use the window function in the
wear close. Right? So what we're going
to do sadly we're going to go and use
the subquery. So it's going to be like
this. select star from and then we're
going to define the condition outside
the subquery. So it's going to be where
the sales is higher than the average
sales. So that's it. Let's go and
execute it. And now as you can see it's
very simple. We got all the orders that
are higher than the average. Right? So
you can see all those sales are higher
than the average. It would be nice if we
can do all those stuff in the first
query. But since we cannot do that, we
need to use the subqueries in order to
filter the data afterward. So that we
can understand the importance of the
comparison analyszis. For example, here
we are finding or evaluating the data
whether they are above the average or
below the average. And this is very
important in the business analyzes. All
right, everyone. So that's all for the
window function average. Next, we're
going to talk about two very interesting
functions, the min and max.
All right guys, so what is min and max
functions? They are very simple but yet
very powerful functions for analytics.
So the min simply is the function that
can return the minimum or let's say the
lowest value within a window where the
max it's exactly the opposite. It's
going to find the maximum value or the
highest value within a window. So now
let's go and understand how SQL works
with these functions. All right. So now
we have the same data and we have two
tasks. First we have to find the lowest
sales for each product. And the second
one side by side we would like to find
the highest sales for each product. So
we're going to go and use the min max.
And as you can see the syntax is very
simple. Min the sales and then the
partition going to be by the products.
And here as well the same stuff but
having the max. Okay. So now let's see
how going to execute the first query. As
usual first it's going to prepare the
data. So it's going to split the data
into two windows. One for the caps and
another one for the gloves. And after
that it's going to search for the lowest
sales within each window separately. So
for the first window we have the
following values 20 10 and five. And of
course the lowest value going to be the
five. So that's why SQL going to find it
over here. And everywhere for this
window it's going to be the value five.
So we have it as the lowest sales for
the product caps. So now it's going to
jump to the next window for the gloves
and start searching the values. So as
you can see we have 30 70 and null. Null
will be ignored. So null will not be
considered as the lowest value. So SQL
going to find the lowest sales with the
30. So it's going to be actually the
first row within this window and the
value the output going to be 30 for each
row. So that's it. It's very simple,
right? Now let's move to the next one.
We have the same stuff but using max. So
the data is partitions and for the first
partition what is the highest value?
It's going to be the first row, right?
The 20. So SQL going to find it and in
the output we will get the highest sales
20 for this window and then it's going
to go to the second window and search
for the highest value. So here we have
two values 30 and 70 and it's going to
be the 70 right. So it's going to point
it over here and in the output we will
get everywhere 70. So guys it's really
simple right now let's back to our
scenario in the average where in our
business we understand nulls as zero in
the sales. So that means first we have
to handle the nulls and replace it with
zero and then we're going to go and
search for the value. So what's going to
happen? We're going to go and replace
nulls with zero. For the max nothing
going to change the highest value going
to be 70 and we're going to get the same
output. But for the min now we have new
lowest value. So it's not anymore the
30. It's actually the zero. So SQL going
to go over here and replace the 30 with
nulls. So nulls is the lowest sales for
the product gloves. So again guys, the
nulls are very tricky and those
functions are really sensitive with the
nulls. Understand what the nulls means
and handle it correctly so that you get
correct results in the output. So that's
it. Let's go back to SQL to have some
tasks and use cases in order to practice
SQL. All right everyone, let's start
with the basic stuff. find the highest
and lowest sales of all orders and as
well find the highest and lowest sales
for each product and we have to provide
additional informations. So let's go and
solve it. Select order ID order and
let's take as well the product ID. Now
let's find the highest sales of all
orders. It going to be the max function
for the sales and the window function
going to be empty since of all orders.
So you are the highest sales. Let's go
for the lowest sales of all orders. It's
going to be exactly the opposite. The
main function for sales over then we
have the lowest sales. So I'm just going
to make it bigger capital. So let's
select the table sales orders. So I
think that's it. Let's have as well the
sales actually. All right. So now let's
go and execute it. So now this is very
simple, right? This is the wholesales.
What is the highest sales? We have the
90 of the order eight. So, as you can
see, we have now the highest sales, the
90, and the lowest sales is the 10. The
first order is the lowest. So, it's very
easy. Now, we're going to go and repeat
the same stuff for the product. So, we
have go and partition the data by the
product ID. So, what I'm going to do,
I'm just going to go and copy paste
stuff around. So, the first one going to
be partition by the product ID. So,
highest sales by product. And the next
one going to be the same stuff. Copy
paste by the product. So that's it.
Let's go and execute it. So now again
the data going to be partitioned and
divided by the product. So for the first
window what is the highest sales? It's
going to be the 90 and the lowest sales
is going to be the 10. So it's exactly
like the overall rights now let's go to
the second window over here. We can see
that the lowest or the highest sales is
the 60 the first one and the lowest this
time is 15. And this is great in order
to see that the SQL going to execute
each of those functions for each window
separately. So let's go to the last
window. It's funny one. So the sales is
60 and we have only one row. So it's
going to be the highest and as well the
lowest sales. So with that as you can
see we can define a range for each
product and the range are different from
each product to another one. For
example, for this product 101 the range
from 10 until 90. But for the second
product we have it between 15 and 60.
Okay guys, let's move to the next one
which is one of my favorites in the
window function where we filter the data
using the minmax functions. Let's have
the following task. It says show the
employees who have the highest salaries.
So this sounds very simple but we can
use the help of window functions in
order to solve it. So now we are working
with the table employees. Let's just
select the data. So select from sales
employees. So that's it. Let's go and
execute it. So now we have five
employees and we have those different
salaries. Let's go and find the highest
salary. So max salary and let's use the
window function over but we don't
partition the data at all. So it's going
to be like this highest salary. So let's
go and execute it. And now by checking
the results we got a new column called
highest salary and inside it we have the
90k. So if you check those five salaries
you can see that the highest is from the
employee Michael. But still the task is
not solved. We have to show only the
employees who have the highest salaries.
So we have somehow to filter the data
and only show this employee. So in order
to do that we have to use the subqueries
since we cannot use the window function
in the wear clause. So what we're going
to do select star from and then our
first query going to be the inner query.
So we have the following condition. It's
going to be the
salary should be equal to the highest
salary. So it's very simple. So with
that we are comparing the salaries with
the highest salaries. If there is a
match the data going to be presented. So
let's go and execute that. And that's
it. As you can see we got the employee
with the highest salary. But if there
are like multiple employees with the
same salary of 90k of course we're going
to get it in the results. I think
Michael going to need a new job. Right.
This is the worst.
So this is another use case for the
window functions minmax. All right. So
now we come to the use case of the
comparison analyzers where we want to
compare the current sales with the
highest and the lowest value. So we have
the following task. It says find the
deviation of each sales from the minimum
and the maximum sales amount. So now as
you can see this is our sales. This is
the highest and this is the lowest. So
now we just have to go and subtract the
data from each others in order to get
the deviation. So it's very simple.
Let's get the first deviation where
we're going to go and subtract the sales
with the lowest value. So it's going to
be like this. So now what we are doing
over here, we are subtracting the sales
from the lowest sales of all records. So
we're going to go and call you
deviation from min. So let's go and
execute it. So now we can see from those
values how far is the current value from
the extreme. The extreme here is the
lowest value. So this is a really great
way on to analyze the extremes in your
data. So now as we are near to the
extreme the value going to be low. So as
you can see here we have a zero. This is
the lowest because we have it exactly as
the extreme. So actually this is our
value. So the 10. Now the next one is
little bit far away from the extreme
which is 15. So we have it here as a
five. So this is not far away from our
extreme value. And then if you check
this value over here we have it 80. So
the distance is very far away from our
extreme value the lowest sales. So this
is really nice analyszis in order to
analyze and evaluate the sales of your
data. Now of course we can go and
evaluate our data with an another
extreme which is the highest sales. So
in order to do that we're going to first
say let's get the highest sorry this one
the highest sales and subtract it from
the sales. So you are the deviation from
the max. So let's go and execute it. So
now we can see in the output we're going
to get exactly the opposite distances.
So the order number one is the farthest
from the extreme. So as you can see we
have the value of 80 and the order eight
is the identical one. So that's why we
have the distance of zero. So now we can
see as well very quickly which data
points are the nearest to the extreme to
the highest sales. So as you can see
guys using the window function min and
max it is very powerful in order to
understand and evaluate your data points
to the
[Music]
extremes. All right everyone so now
we're going to focus on very important
use case. One of the must know use cases
for data aggregations is doing running
total and rolling total. These two
concepts are very important for data
analyszis and doing reporting that you
must know. The key use case for those
two concept is to do tracking. For
example, we can go and track the current
total sales with the target sales in our
business. And as well, it's great in
order to do historical analyszis for the
trends. Okay. So now the question is
what is running a rolling total. They
are basically very similar. They're
going to go and aggregate a sequence of
members and the aggregation going to get
updated each time we add a new member to
the sequence. A sequence could be like a
time sequence. That's why we call this
type an analyzes over time. So now we
still have the question, what is the
difference between the running and the
rolling totals. The running total going
to go and aggregate everything from the
beginning until the current data point
without dropping off any old data. Where
on the other hand in the rolling total
it going to go and focus on a specific
time window like the last 30 days or the
last two monthses and each time we add a
new member or a new data point to the
window we will be dropping off the
oldest data point in the window and with
this we're going to get the effect of
rolling or let's say shifting window
okay I totally understand if this might
be complicated now let's go and have
very simple example in order to
understand this concept and as well how
we can solve it using SQL all right guys
so now We have very simple example. We
have the months and sales and we have it
twice because I want to show you side by
side how SQL works with the running
total and the rolling total. So now what
is the task on the left side? We want to
find the running total of sales for each
month and on the right side we would
like to find three month rolling total
of the sales for each month. So they
sound very similar but on the right side
we have only fixed window. So now how we
can solve this using SQL. On the left
side we can use sum of sales. So we want
to go and aggregate all the sales using
the sum function. And the definition for
the window going to be like this order
by month and of course you can go and do
anything like you can have here an
average. And if you use an average with
order by you will get the running
average or the running max or the
running count and so on. So that means
always if you go and mix an aggregate
function together with an order by you
will generate an effect of running
total. Now on the right side we can have
the same stuff. So we can have an
aggregate function together with order
by. So sum of sales, order by month. So
far we have everything like the left
side, right? But now you might ask why
is going to go and generate this effect
the running total. We didn't here
specify like crazy stuff, right? It's
all about the definition of the frame
close. So now do you remember if you use
an order by and you don't specify a
frame close you will get like hidden or
let's say default frame close and it's
going to look like this rows between
unbounded preceding and current row. And
what was the definition of the running
total? It's going to go and aggregate
all the data from the very first
beginning well the unbounded proceeding
until the current position the current
row without dropping off any old
members. So that means the definition of
the running total going to be the exact
definition of the default frame clause.
That's why it's going to go and generate
the effect of the running total. Now
let's go to the right side the rolling
total. Here again we have the same stuff
right. We're going to go and aggregate
the data using the sum function and
we're going to go and sort the data
order by month. So with that we are as
well generating the effect of running
total. So each time you use order by
with aggregate function. So now in the
running total we want always to specify
a frame. So here in this example three
months. So that means if we are getting
a new month we don't want to include the
latest months. We want always to be
fixed window. Now in order to have this
fixed window effect we have to go and
redefine the frame close because if you
leave it as a default like the running
total the frame going to keep extending.
You will see this effect in the example.
So now we define it like this rows
between two preceding and current row.
So the total number of rows going to be
included in each window going to be
maximum of three months. So now I know
you might saying bar what you are
talking about you didn't get anything.
It's total normal you will understand it
only with an example. So in order to do
this let's start with the left side. So
first going to go and sort the data. So
everything is sorted from the smallest
month until the highest one. So from
January until July everything is good.
And now it's going to go and start
working with the frame. So the frame
says unbounded proceeding. So this going
to be static. It's going to be always
pointing to January. This is the
unbounded proceeding. The first row in
the data set. And now of course we are
starting from top to bottom. The current
row going to be pointing as well to
January. So the frame going to look like
this. It's going to be only one row and
the total sale of this row going to be
20. So that's why we're going to have in
the output 20. So now let's move to the
right side. The current row going to be
as well January. And what is the two
proceeding? We don't have it yet. So
it's going to be pointing maybe
somewhere here before the table. So
again, what is the frame? It's going to
be as well one row. So in the output, we
will get exactly the same result 20. So
so far there is no differences between
the running total and the rolling total.
But let's keep going. Now we're going to
go to the next row over here. So what
can happen to our frame? It going to go
and extend, right? So we're going to
have now two months in this frame. And
what is the total sales over here? It's
going to be 30. So we added a new
member. You can calculate it like this.
Either go and calculate all the sales
within the frame or you can go and say
this is the previous aggregated value
plus the new member. So the previous one
was 20. The new member is 10. We will
get 30. Both of them is correct. So now
let's move to the right side. What's
going to happen? We're going to be as
well at February. The two preceding is
still like pointing somewhere outside.
And here the window going to go and
extend like this. We have two months and
the same aggregation going to happen. So
we have 30. So so far nothing crazy
right. Let's go to the next month March.
The frame going to be extended. So we
have now three months. And the
aggregation going to be either here 60
or 30 + 30. We will get the running
total of 60. And now on the right side
what going to happen? We're going to
point as well to March. And this time
the two proceeding going to be pointing
to January. And this is the first time
we are getting the whole fixed frame.
Right? So we have here three muscles in
this frame. So what is the total of
that? It's going to be 60. Okay. So now
you say, okay, we're still getting the
same results. There's no difference. I'm
going to say wait for it. It's going to
be the next one. So as we go to April,
the effect here is that the frame going
to get extended to four months because
always we start from the first month
until the current month without dropping
any member outside. So what is the total
of this? It's going to be 65. Sorry,
like this. So now on the right side,
what going to happen? We're going to go
and add a new member. the April but we
are at the maximum sides of the window
we have only three and that's because
the two preceding going to shift as well
down over here so the boundary going to
be from February until April and with
that we are dropping off January and now
you're going to see the effect it is
sliding it is rolling or shifting from
top to bottom and that's because the
boundaries as well shifting so you can
see now the effect of the rolling total
the newest member going to be added the
oldest member going to be But we are
allowed only to have three muscles. So
what is the total of this? It's going to
be 45. So this times we are not
aggregating this value the 60 together
with the five. We are aggregating the
values within the window. So now let's
keep going. Now we are at June. What can
happen on the left side? The frame going
to get bigger. And with that we will get
the result of 135. So the frame is
getting really bigger. But on the right
side it's going to has a fixed frame. So
we are just sliding, shifting and
rolling. So with that we are adding new
member. Another member is leaving the
oldest one. And the total over here
going to be 105. And now we're going to
go to the last row. We will have
everything for the ring total. So the
whole data set is going to be
aggregated. So this is the maximum what
we're going to get. It's going to be
around 175. But on the right side it
just going to keep shifting until we
reach the last record. the window the
frame going to be as well shifting like
this. So the total of this going to be
105. Okay guys so you see it's very
simple the running total it's always
consider everything from the starting
position until the current row without
dropping any member. The rolling total
it's always drop the oldest member in
order to add something new and the
window is keep shifting. So the running
total is very great in order to do
tracking like for example budget
tracking or we track for example the
current total sales with a target or
something like that. So always we are
considering the whole data sets but with
the rolling total we always do here
focused analyzes. We are always
interested with the window of 3 months.
So they might sound very similar but
they have completely different scope for
analyzes but both of them are doing
aggregations over time. So they're going
to help us to do analyzes over time like
checking whether our business is growing
over time or declining. So guys as you
can see using very simple SQLs using the
window functions we can do really great
analysis on our data. So those stuff are
really fundamental of data analyzes or
doing reporting for our business. So
window functions are really powerful for
data
analytics. Okay. Okay. So now we have
the following task and it says calculate
the moving average of sales for each
products over the time. So now we have
here something called moving average. It
is very similar to the running total. In
the running total we used count and sum
and so on. But here we're going to go
and use the function average and instead
of calling it running average we call it
moving average. So let's go and solve
the task. Let's start always by
selecting the usual stuff. So let's get
the order ID. Let's get the product ID
and I would say since it's over the time
I will get the order date as well and
the last one the sales from our table
sales orders. So that's it. Let's go and
execute it. So now we got our 10 orders
with the products order date and sales.
Let's start building our window function
step by step. So which function do we
need? We need the average. This is the
easiest one. It says moving average. So
that's it. We need the sales. So it's
going to be the average of sales. Let's
go and define the window. So now do we
have to divide the data, partition the
data? Well, yes. It says for each
product that means we're going to go and
use the partition by clause by the
product ID. So now I would say that's it
for the first step. So average by
product. So let's go and execute it. So
now if you check the result, you can see
that we got our windows. So the first
one for the product 101 and the total
average of the sales going to be 35. So
we have like aggregated one value for
each window. The same thing for the next
product and for the next and so on. So
we don't have any progress over time or
something like moving average all the
time. Right? We don't have this effect.
We have just one average for each
window. So now in order to have the
effect of the moving average, it's going
to be like the running total. We have to
use the aggregate function together with
the order by. So I'm just going to make
it in the new column. I'm just going to
copy everything like here. And now what
we going to do? Order by. And since it's
over the time, we're going to go and use
the order dates. Order dates. And we're
going to have it ascending because it's
overtime. Over time always like start
with the earliest dates, end up with the
latest dates. So from the lowest to the
highest, we're going to leave it like
this. So let's call it moving average.
So now let's go and execute it. And we
got here an extra comma because of the
copy paste. So let's execute it again.
All right. So now let's check the
results. Let's take the first window
over here. And you can see we have on
the moving average like a progress. So
it start with 10 15 14 35. So there is
like moving average. We don't have one
solid number for the average. We have
different values. So now how SQL going
to solve this? It's really simple. It's
going to start row by row. So the first
row what is the average of 10? It's
going to be 10. Then moving on to the
next one it's going to be 10 + 20
divided by 2 you will get 15. So now
moving to the third one all those three
values going to be summarized divided by
three you will get 40. And now to the
last row in the window it's going to be
summarizing all those four values
divided by four and you will get 35. And
this is exactly the same value in the
previous column. You have here the
average byproducts. We don't have order
by you got as well 35 exactly like this
last row and that's because we have the
same calculation. It is summarizing all
those four values dividing it by four.
But now it's interesting the next value.
So as you can see the next value it
comes from another window. So you see
here we have 15 for the product 102 but
the average going to be as well 15. So
scale is not considering the old values
from the other window. So SQL going to
calculate each window separately. So
it's again here this is the first value
of this window 15 the average 15 then
the same stuff right. So summarizing
those values divided by two and so on.
And this we call in data analyzes this
last field over here we call it a moving
average and you can implement it very
simply using an average function
together with the order by. All right,
let's move to the next task and it says
calculate the moving average of sales
for each product over time including
only the next order. So as you can see
the first part we have already done it
right. We have the moving average and
divided by partition by for the products
but here we have more specifications. It
says including only the next order. That
means we are talking about the current
order and as well the next order. So
here we have like a fixed frame or fixed
window. So we don't need the whole
average of the window. We need only
maximum two orders in each calculation.
So how we going to do that? We can have
our custom frame close inside our window
function. So that means we cannot leave
it as a default. We have to specify it.
So let's go and do that. I will just
copy the old definition of the window
because we have the exact stuff. So we
have the average sales over partition by
product ID order by date. So this is the
first part. So now we would like to have
this fixed window. So we're going to go
now and define our frame close. I'm just
going to zoom out a little bit. It's
going to be rows between. So we have now
the boundaries of the frame. It says
including the next order. So we're going
to go and use the following. So the
first boundary going to be the current
row. And since it's next order, so it's
going to be one following. So that is
our frame including only the next order.
And we have it like this one following.
Let's call it yeah rolling average. So
that's it. Let's go and execute. So now
let's go and check the result. You can
see the moving average has completely
different values as the rolling average.
So let's go and understand why. We're
going to do it row by row. Let's take
the first row over here. So the sales
here is 10 and the rolling average is
15. So why is that? Because in the
calculation we are considering the next
value. So 10 + 20 divided by 2 you will
get 15. So that means the SQL defined
the frame like this those two rows for
this calculation for the first row. So
now moving on to the second row. SQL
going to include as well the third one
right the next one. But since the window
is only two orders it's going to go and
drop the first row. So the next frame
going to be like this. And as you can
see it's going to be 20 + 19 divided by
2. You will get 55. So now you can see
the effect of the rolling average.
Right? So now for the next one going to
be exact same. So we are at the third
row. It's going to go and include the
next one and we're going to get the same
value because 19 + 20 divid by two you
will get 55. Now interesting to the last
row in the window over here. It will not
go and consider the next value because
it is outside of the window. So it's
going to be 20 and it's going to stay as
well 20. So that's it. All right guys.
So with that we have learned about the
moving average, the rolling average and
those amazing concepts using the window
function. All right. Now we're going to
have a quick overview of the different
use cases in the aggregate functions and
how the definition of the window going
to change the whole use case. So now the
first use case is finding the overall
total. And here if you don't define
anything in the window if you leave it
empty what going to happen you are doing
here overall analyzes. So you're going
to go and aggregate the whole data sets
and then provide this aggregation for
each row. So this is what happen if you
leave it empty. You don't define
anything. You are aggregating the whole
data sets. Now moving to the next step,
we can do analysis called total pair
groups. So what we're going to do, we
will add partition by to the definition
of the window. So by adding for example
here partition by products, what can
happen? The data going to be splitted
into two categories or two groups and
the aggregation going to be done for
each window separately. This is of
course a great analysis in order to go
and compare different products like here
the caps and gloves. So this is helpful
in order to compare categories. So you
can do this analysis total pair groups
if you use the partition by. Now if you
go and use the order by you're going to
land in the third use case. As we
learned we will be doing running total.
So as you can see here in the output we
are building a cumulative value for the
sales and this going to help us in order
to do progress over time analyzes in
order to understand the performance of
our business. And now moving on to the
last use case the final phase of the
window function with the aggregation.
Here you have the aggregate function
together with the order by with
customized fixed window. And of course
we can use it in order to help us
building progress over time in specific
fixed window. And of course you can use
those use cases you will get the same
effect if you use the other functions
not only the sum you can use average
count max so all aggregate functions. So
guys as you can see the window function
in scale is very important in order to
do data analytics by just like changing
the part of the window you are
generating a whole new use case for data
analytics. All right friends so now
let's do a quick recap about the window
aggregate functions. So what they do
they're going to go and aggregate a set
of values and return a single aggregated
value for each row. So it's very similar
to the groupy but here we don't lose
details. Now to the next point what are
the rules for the syntax about the
expressions they all expect a number in
the expression. So you have to pass a
number like sales or any integer but
only for the count you can go and use
any data type. And the things for the
aggregate functions are very simple.
Everything is optional inside the
definition of the overclouds or the
definition of the window. So you can go
and use partition by order by frames or
not or just leave everything empty. So
everything is optional. So now as we
learned we have a lot of use cases for
the aggregate functions and they are
really amazing for analytics. So the
first one the simplest one you can do
overall analyzes if you just leave the
window function empty. So you will get
one big number about your business. And
the next use case we can do total bear
groups analyzes. As you've learned, we
can use partition by in order to compare
categories with each others like
comparing the products or customers and
so on. Moving on to the next one, we can
do partto-hole analyszis. We can go and
compare the performance of each data
point with the overall. So you can for
example compare the sales to the total
sales in the window or to the all data
sets. And we have many comparison
analyzes. We can go and compare the
current value with the average or we can
compare them to the extreme to the
highest sales to the lowest sales and so
on. And another use case, we can go and
identify data quality issues in our
data. So we can go for example and
identify duplicates using the count
function. Moving on to the next use
case, we have the outlier detection. We
can go and find out which data points
are above the average and below the
average and so on. Then the next one we
have the running total. As we learned,
it is great tool in order to track the
progress or to monitor the performance
of our business over the time. Or if you
want to be more specific, you can go and
use the rolling total in order to have
like a specific window and only track
this window like three months or
something like that. And the last use
case, we can go and calculate the moving
average of our data. So it's really
amazing how order by and aggregate
functions can open for you a door for
amazing or advanced analyzers. So guys,
as you can see, we have a lot of use
cases for the window aggregate functions
in the world of data analytics. All
right. Right. So with that we have
covered the aggregate window functions
and in the next step it's going to be
very important. We will learn how to
rank our data using window functions. So
let's
go. All right. So now let's say that we
have the following data. We have
products and their sales. If you want
now to go and rank your products first
you have to sort the data based on
something like for example ranking the
products based on their sales. So that
means SQL first is going to go and start
sorting your data from the highest to
the lowest. So sorting the data is
always the first thing SQL has to do
before ranking anything. Now in order to
rank our data we have two methods. The
first method we call it the integer
based ranking. So that means SQL going
to go and assign for each row an integer
a whole number based on the position of
the row. So now by looking to the
example the first row we have the
product E with the sales 70 it's going
to be rank number one then the next row
the product B with 30 sales we will get
the rank number two then the next one
going to be three four and the last one
going to be five. So that means SQL here
is assigning an integer for each row
based on their position in the sorted
list. So this method we call it integer
based ranking. Now let's go to the
second method we have the
percentagebased ranking. So in this
methods going to go first and calculate
the relative position of the row
compared to all others and then assign a
percentage for each row. So here in the
output is going to start assigning
percentages instead of integer and we're
going to have a scale from 0 to one. So
now if you go and compare both of the
methods you can see that on the left
side on the integer base ranking we have
discrete distinct values. So it starts
from 1 then 2 3 and end up in this
example by five. So it really depends on
how many rows do we have in the results.
So it could be five, it could be 500, 5
million and so on. But in the right side
we have always the same scale from one
to zero. So between 0 and one we have
infinite number of data points and this
scale we call it a normalized scale or
we call it continuous scale continuous
values. So now the question is when to
use which method. So for example for the
percentage based ranking it is great to
answer such questions find the top 20%
products based on their sales. So this
method is a great way in order to
understand the contributions of data
values to the overall total and we call
this kind of analyszis a distribution
analyszis where in the other hand in the
integer based ranking we can answer
questions like find the top three
products. So with this question we are
not interesting about the contributions
of each product to the overall total. We
are just interested in the position of
the value within a list. So this is as
well very commonly used analyzes and
reporting. We call it top button in
analyzers. So now let's group up our
ranking functions based on those two
methods. For the first group in the
integer based ranking we have four
functions. Row number rank d rank and
inile. But in the other hand we have
only two functions that generate
percentage based ranking. We have the
cumid list and as well the percentile.
So now that was an introduction an
overview of those methods and how we
group up those ranking functions. Next
we're going to go and learn about the
syntax of the ranking functions. Most of
them follow the same rules. So for
example we start always with the
function name. So we have here the rank.
But as you can see we don't use any
expressions. So they don't allow you to
use any argument inside it. It must be
empty. So this is the first rule using
rank functions. Then about the
definition of the window as usual the
partition by it is an optional thing.
You can use it or leave it. And now to
the second part we have the order by it
is as well required. So you must order
the data or sort your data in order to
do ranking. So you cannot leave it
empty. So that means for the definition
of the window at least we should have an
order by for example here sales. So we
cannot leave it empty. All right. So the
two requirements you cannot use any
expressions for those functions and as
well you have to sort your data using
order by. Okay. So now let's have an
overview of all functions. So as you can
see all those functions are ranking
functions and almost all of them don't
allow to use any expressions inside
them. Beside this function here we have
the end tile. it accepts a number inside
it. So that means you cannot use it
empty. You should use a number inside
it. All others must be empty. So now for
the partition by all of them are
optional and for the order by all of
them are required. So you must use order
by and the frame clause they are not
allowed to use in the ranking functions.
So you cannot change the definition of
the frame inside the window function. So
now what we're going to do as usual,
we're going to go and deep dive into all
of those functions in order to
understand when to use them and what are
the use cases and as well practice in
SQL. So we're going to start with the
first one, the row
number. All right. So what is a row
number in SQL? The row number function
going to go and assign for each row a
unique number as a rank and it doesn't
care at all about the ties. That means
if you have two rows sharing the same
value, they will not share the same
rank. Okay. So now we have very simple
example. We have a list of all sales and
we have the following query. So it's
going to start with the ranking function
row number. It doesn't accept any
argument inside it. And the definition
of the window going to be like this
order by sales disk. So that means we're
going to go and sort the data descending
from the highest to the lowest. So SQL
going to go and do the following. The
highest going to be the 100. The lowest
going to be the 20. And here we have
twice the 80. So now once SQL done
sorting the data, what's going to
happen? It's going to start assigning a
rank. So the row number going to go and
assign a unique number for each row. So
that means it's going to start with the
first one. The 100 going to be the rank
number one. The next one going to be
rank number two. The 80 going to be rank
number three. And the 54. And then the
last one going to be five. And now if
you check the output you can see that
all those numbers are unique. We don't
have any repetitions. So 1 2 3 4 5
there's no repetitions. They are unique
distinct value. And as well there are no
skipping of ranking. So that means we
have here 1 2 3 there is no jumping to 6
7 or something. They are clear sequence
of distinct value and there are no gaps.
But still there is something special in
our data. We can see that in the sales
we have the same value twice. So we have
two rows with the same sales. As you can
see in the row number they will get
distinct values. So they will not share
the same ranking. So that means row
number does not handle the ties. If you
have multiple rows sharing the same
values they will not share the same
rank. They going to have a distinct rank
different ranks. So this is how the row
number works in SQL. It generates unique
ranks for each row. It does not handle
the ties and as well it doesn't leave
any gaps. So there is no skipping of
ranking. So now let's go to SQL in order
to have few examples and use cases. All
right. So now we have the following
task. It's very simple. Rank the orders
based on their sales from the highest to
the lowest. So now this is very easy.
We're going to go and select first the
data. So order ID, product ID. Let's
take the sales as well and select the
table. So it's going to be sales orders.
Let's go and execute it. So with that we
got all our orders. What we're going to
do now is to assign for each row a rank.
So that means we need a column here that
contains the rank for each row. So in
order to do that we're going to go and
use the window function row number. It
doesn't accept any argument inside it.
So should be empty. And then we have to
define the window. So as we learned in
the ranking functions we cannot leave it
empty. We have to sort the data using
order by. So order by is a must. We
don't have to use any partition by. So
we're going to rank all the data that we
have inside the table. So how to sort
the data? It says it should be based on
their sales from highest to lowest. That
means we order by sales since from
highest to lowest we have to use the
descending. And now we're going to go
and give it a name sales rank and let's
say row since we are using the row
number. So that's it. It's very simple.
Let's go and execute it. So now let's
have a look to the results. Before SQL
did sort the data by the order ID since
we didn't define anything. But since now
we are order by sale descending SQL went
and sorted the data by the sales from
the highest to the lowest and start
assigning a rank or let's say an integer
unique integer for each row. So now the
highest order going to be the order
number eight. We have the sales of 90.
This is the highest one. So as you can
see we have 1 2 3 4 5 until 10. So now
by checking the results you can see that
the ranking here is unique. So there is
no duplicates over here and as well
there is no skipping or gaps. So we have
everything between 1 and 10 even though
that we have in our data a couple of
sales that sharing the same value. So
for example we have those two orders you
can see both of them has the 60 at the
sales but they don't share the same
ranking. Right? So we have here as well
the 9 and three they share the same
value 20 but they don't share the same
ranking. So with that we have solved the
task. It's very simple. We have now a
rank based on the sales from highest to
the lowest.
All right. So what is a rank function in
SQL? The rank function going to go and
assign for each row a number a rank and
this time it going to go and handle the
ties. So that means if in your data you
have two rows having the same values
they going to share the same ranking.
One thing about the ranking function is
that it's going to go and leave gaps in
the ranking. So there is possibility of
skipping ranks. In order to understand
how the rank function works in SQL,
we're going to have a very simple
example. All right. So again with the
same data but with different function.
So our window looks like this. It start
with the function rank doesn't accept
any argument inside it. Then we have the
window like this. Order by sales
descending from the highest to the
lowest. And our data is already sorted
like that. So now how is scale going to
go and assign the ranks. The first row
going to be the highest rank. So the
value 100 is going to be one. Then the
second one going to be two. But now for
the third one, as you can see, we have
here two values that are the same. So we
have a tie and this time SQL going to go
and as well let them to share the same
rank. So both of them going to be the
rank two. So it's not like the row
number where we have over here three.
This time we have two because we have a
tie. So having same values means they
going to share the same rank. And now
moving to the next value going to be
tricky one because if you check over
here you can see that the next rank
should be like the three right? So we
have one two and then the next value
that generated in the rank should be
three but going to say you know what
this value position going to be number
four. So as you can see 1 2 3 four. So
actually the position number here is
four and going to go and give it the
rank of four. So with that SQL going to
be leaving a gap in the ranking. You can
see we are skipping the rank number
three and this always happen once you
have a tie where you are sharing the
same ranking. So for the next one it's
going to be easy. It's going to be the
row number five. So now by looking to
the output of the rank function you can
see that we don't have a unique ranking.
Here we have shared ranking in case of
the ties. So it handles the ties but
here we have gaps in the ranks. So we
are skipping ranks. When I think about
the rank function I think about the
Olympics. If two athletes tie for the
gold medal, the first place, there will
be no silver medal for the second place,
the next medal going to be given to the
bronze to the third place. All right. So
now let's go in SQL in order to practice
the rank function. All right. Now we're
going to go and solve the same task but
using the rank function. So what we're
going to do, we're going to stay with
the same example over here and we're
going to rank the order based on their
sales from highest to lowest but this
time using the rank function. So we use
the rank and everything inside is going
to be empty and then our window going to
be exactly the same as before. So over
order by sales and disk. So let's give
it a name sales rank. Yeah, let's give
it a rank. So that's it. As you can see
the syntax is very simple and very
similar to the row number. We just
changed the function. So now let's go
and execute this in order to check the
results. So now let's go and check the
results by looking to the new rank. If
you go and compare it with the old rank,
we can see that we are sharing some
ranking, right? We have here the two
twice. So the rank number two, we have
it twice because we have over here the
same value. So 60 60 we have it here two
and two. But if you compare it to the
row number, you can see that it is not
sharing the same ranking. So this is one
difference. And as well here the same
thing. They have the same value. The
sales is 20. So we have it twice the
rank number seven. And here we have it
as different values. And the next value
as you can see we are skipping the rank.
So there is gap there is no rank of
eight. So you can see that this is the
row number nine and that's why it get
the nine. The same thing I believe over
here. So now if you check those two
ranks the next one should be three. But
since it is in the row number four it's
going to get the rank four. So by
checking the results we can see that
sharing the same ranks and as well we
have gaps. So this is how the rank
works.
All right. So what is a dense rank? It
is very similar to the ranking function.
It's going to go and assign for each row
a number rank and it as well handles the
ties. So same values they going to share
the same ranking but this time it
doesn't leave any gaps like the rank
function. So the d rank it will not
leave any gaps. It will not skip any
ranking. So in order to understand this
we're going to have a very simple
example. So let's go. All right. So
again the same data but with different
function. We have this time the rank
function dense rank and the window going
to be the same order by sales descending
from the highest to the lowest. So now
the data is as well sorted already.
Let's see how SQL going to go and assign
the ranks as usual. The first row going
to be the rank number one the second as
well but again here we have the same
values. So we have same values and it's
like the rank it's going to go and share
the same rank. So both of them going to
has the rank number two. And now you
might say, well this is very similar to
the rank function. So why do we have
dense rank? I'm going to say wait for
it. We're going to have the difference
in the next value. So it's going to come
over here. This value is exactly after
the tie. In rank SQL went and took the
position number. So the row number it
was four, right? So 1 2 3 4. But this
time with the dense rank SQL will not
leave gaps in ranking. So there will be
no skipping the next rank in the
sequence going to be three. So that's
why we're going to have the rank three
for this value. So as you can see there
is no gap. We have one, we have two and
three. So we are not skipping, we are
not leaving any gaps. And the last one
going to be four. So this is exactly the
difference between the dense rank and
the rank. So now by checking the output
of the dense rank, you can see that we
don't have unique ranks. We have here
shared ranks. As you can see, we have
here repetition. So, it handles the ties
and as well it doesn't leave any gaps.
It doesn't skip anything in the ranking.
Okay, so that's it. Now, let's go back
to SQL to practice the dense rank. All
right, so now we have the same task.
Rank the orders based on their sales
from highest to lowest. So, we're going
to do the same stuff, but this time
using the function dense rank. So, dense
rank is going to be empty. And then
we're going to define it like all others
over order by sales disk. And then we're
going to give it the name of sales rank
dense. And that's it. So as you can see
all of those functions having the exact
syntax, right? So let's go and execute
it. Okay. So now let's go and check the
results. We got our newest rank using
the dens. And by just checking the
results, you can see that it handles the
tie. We have two twice, right? So let's
check the example over here. We have the
sales 60 twice. That's why they are
sharing the same ranking in the dense
and as well in the normal rank. But now
what is interesting is the value after
the tie. So as you can see over here
with the dense rank we have three. So we
didn't skip any ranking. We don't have
any gap 1 2 and then three. But with the
rank it's just focus on the position
number. So it is the row number four.
That's why it's four. With that we have
a gap. So as you can see now we don't
have any gaps in the dense rank. So we
have three four five. And now we have
over here the same two values. So we
have sales of 2020 and they share the
six twice. So as you can see there is
difference now between the dense and the
rank. So here we have seven seven but
here we are at the rank 66. So that's
why we have differences between them
because we skipped before in the rank
number three. Now the other stuff you
can see we have seven and eight. So now
if you compare those three ranking you
can see that they all start with the
rank number one but they didn't all end
with the same ranking. So the row number
and the rank they really focus on the
position number or the row number of the
orders. So you can see over here it is
the row number 10. That's why we have
here 10 and 10. So the scale is from 1
to 10. And that is exactly the same for
the row number from 1 to 10. But with
the d over here we have it from 1 to 8
and that's because we shared the same
ranking and with that we wasted let's
say few ranks. So the scale is different
from the two others. And that's because
we have ties twice. This is one tie and
as well we have over here one tie.
That's why we are missing over here two
ranks. So this is how the dense ranks
works. And you can go and compare now
all three togethers in order to
understand how those ranks are
working. All right. So now let's quickly
compare the three functions side by
side. Let's start with the first point
about the uniqueness of the rank. And if
you compare those three you can see that
only the row number generates unique
distinct rank. So this going to be
unique rank and the two others we have
duplicates or let's say shared ranks.
Okay. So now the second point whether
the function handles the ties and the
only one that doesn't handle the ties is
the row number. So this one doesn't
handle the ties and the two others
handles the ties since they offer the
shared rank. And now we have the last
point about leaving gaps or skipping
ranking. So now if you check the row
number and the dense rank you can see
there will be no skipping. So there is
no gaps for the row number and as well
for the dense rank only for the rank
function the middle one we are skipping
ranks and we are leaving gaps. So that's
it guys. This is the differences between
those three functions. I tend usually to
work with the row number more often than
that to others.
All right guys, so now I had a look to
those three functions and I checked my
projects real projects and I found out
that there are many use cases for the
function row number compared to the
other functions dense rank and rank. So
now what we're going to do I'm going to
show you a few use cases for the rank
number that I usually use in my real
projects in order for you to understand
how important is the row number
function. So let's go to SQL. All right.
So now let's start with the first use
case and we have the task of find the
top highest sales for each product. So
this is very classic in reporting or
data analyzes. We call this top end
analyzes. So here the managers or
decision makers they would like to have
the best performers or the best success
in our data. So for example the top
highest five customers or the top five
products or categories and so on. So
this is very important analyzis in order
to focus on the best products or on to
the most important customers and so on
and this is as I said very classic and
very important in order to make
decisions in the business. So now let's
see how we can solve this. So we're
going to start with the usual stuff.
Let's first select the data. So select
order ID. Let's take as well the product
ID and the sales from sales orders. So
let's go and execute this. And now as we
know that for each product we have
multiple orders and we have multiple
sales but we are interested only in the
highest sales for each product. So we
have to go and create a rank. In order
to do that we're going to use the row
function row number and we have to
define the window now. So do we need
partition by check the query. So it says
for each product that means we have to
divide the data by the product ID. So
let's go and use the partition by
products ID. And now we must use the
order by. So order by. And now how to
sort the data by the sales, right? And
it is from the highest to the lowest. So
let's go sales. And we have here
descending. So from highest to lowest.
Let's go and give it a name. So you're
going to be rank by products. So let's
go and execute this. And now by looking
to the result, you can see that SQL did
divide the data by the product ID. So we
have here like around four windows. The
first one over here you can see that the
rank starts from one end with four. So
the highest rank can be the order number
eight with the sales of 90 and then it
goes to the four. Now as you can see
that the second window we have a new
ranking. So it resets the first going to
be uh the order number 10 and the last
one going to be order number two. So as
you can see each window has its own
ranking and as well the last one we have
it only as one row. So now of course in
the task we have to return the highest.
So we are not interested in the others.
We have to return this row this row as
well and this one and this one. So as
you can see we have to return everything
that has the rank one. We are not
interested in the rank 2 3 4 and so on.
So we would like to have the highest. So
now in order to filter the data what
we're going to do we're going to go and
use subqueries. So select star from and
then we're going to have the following
condition. So where and we're going to
say rank by product equals to one. So we
are interested only on the rank number
one. So let's go and execute it. And
with that since we have four products in
our data, we're going to have only four
rows and we have the highest sales. So
as you can see we have only number one
over here. And those sales are the
highest for each product. And with that
we have solved the tasks by finding the
top end analyzers.
Okay, moving on to the next use case. We
have the following task and it says find
the lowest two customers based on their
total sales. So now we have the exact
opposite use case. We call it button in
analyzes. So now in this example in the
business the decision makers want to
optimize the costs want to cut costs and
with that they have to analyze the
lowest performers in the products or the
lowest performance in the employees in
order to cut costs. So now with this
analysis the decision makers are not
focusing on the best successful stuff.
We are focusing on the lowest stuff the
lowest performers. So now let's solve
this tasks. So now if you check the
question we have multiple stuff right we
have the total sales and as well we have
to find the lowest two customers. So we
have ranking and as well aggregations
remember we can do stuff together with
the group I. So now let's do it step by
step. First let's select the data right.
So what do we need? Order ID customer ID
and we need the sales from sales orders.
So let's go and execute this. So now if
you check the customers over here we
have around four customers and they have
multiple sales. Now we would like to
have the total sales for each customers
in order to find the lowest two. So
let's start first with the aggregations.
So what we going to do? We're going to
go and aggregate the sales. So the sum
of sales and let's call it total sales.
And now in order to do the group by we
have to have only the customer. So group
by and we have the customer ID. So it is
very simple group by statements. Let's
go and execute this. So now by checking
the result we can see that SQL did
aggregate the data. We have four rows
and that's because we have four
customers and we have their total sales.
So we have solved the first part of the
task. We have the total sales for each
customers. Now let's move to the second
part. It says lowest two customers. That
means we have to use the ranking
functions in order to rank those
customers. So we are not interested in
all customers. We are interested only in
the lowest two. So in order to do that
now we're going to go and use the window
function row number. So and then over.
Now do we have to partition the data?
Well no we don't have to do that. We
have now to sort the data. So order by.
So this time we're going to go and use
the aggregations in the order by. So the
sum of sales and we want to have it
sorted from the lowest to the highest.
So I'm just going to go and use the
defaults. So it is ascending. Now let's
call it rank customers. So that's it.
Again here the rule is that if you are
using a window function together with
the group by function, you have to use
only columns that is used in the group
by. So this should be working. Let's go
and execute it. So now as you can see in
the results, we got an extra column for
the rank. So now the lowest customer
going to be the customer number two. The
second one going to be four with the 90
total sales. And the highest customer
with the sales is going to be the last
one, the 125 customer number three. So
now we have almost everything but the
list should contain only the last two.
So in order to do that to filter the
data, we're going to go and use
subquery. So select star
from and then we have to define the
condition where rank customers it should
be smaller or equal to two. Right? So
with that we will get the first two. So
let's go and execute this. And with that
we got the lowest two customers based on
their total sales. So customer number ID
you two and the four. So that's it. We
have solved the task and now we have
done button in
analyzes. Okay let's keep moving to the
next use case and we have the following
task. It says assign unique ids to the
rows of the table orders archive. So now
guys we might be in situation where you
have a table without any primary key and
you would like to create an ID for each
row. So in order to do that we can use
the function row number in order to
generate unique identifier ids for each
row inside our table if we don't have
one. And generating such ID for each
row. It's very important to do stuff
like importing data, exporting data,
maybe joining tables as well using this
ID or let's say optimizing the
performance of query using the ID. So
now let's see how we can generate that
using row number. Okay. So now let's
first select the table order archives in
order to understand the content. So
select star from sales orders archive.
So let's go and execute. So now by
checking the result you can see that we
have 10 orders and we have repetitions
in the order ID over here. So it is not
really primary key. As you can see over
here we have twice the ID four and here
we have three times the ID6. So now what
we're going to do we're going to go and
generate unique identifier for each row.
So in order to do that what we're going
to do going to go over here and say row
number and then we're going to define
the window function. We don't partition
the data at all but we have to sort the
data by the order ID. So order by order
ID or you can use something else as well
using the order date or something
doesn't matter. So let's add to it order
data as well and let's call it unique
ID. Let's go and execute this. Now by
checking the data you can see that we
have a new ID over here that comes from
the row number and we have like a unique
identifier. As you can see we have 10
rows and with that we have as well 10
different distinct unique ids. So with
this as you can see we have solved the
task and we have now a unique identifier
an ID for the table orders archive. So
now having this ID we can do many stuff
like joining tables or doing something
special and important called pagenating.
Imagine we have like a huge table and we
would like to retrieve the data. So now
in order to not have all the data in one
go we can go and divide the data by the
primary ID or by unique identifier. For
example, we can make a page from 1 until
100,000 and then the second page starts
from 100K to 200ks. So now by dividing
the data, we can maybe improve exporting
or importing data or we can have faster
retrieval for the users. We don't want
to have the whole data in one go in one
page. So it has a lot of benefits using
pagionating and we can do that only if
we have a nice ID like
this. All right. Right. Today I'm going
to show you the last use case for the
function row number that I usually use
in my real projects. So sometimes if you
are doing data analyszis you're going to
find out that there are data quality
issues especially with the duplicates.
So what I usually use I use the raw
number in order to identify the
duplicates. Not only that I can use it
in order to delete the duplicates. So we
can use it in order to do data
cleansing. And this is essential task
for each data engineer not only data
analysts in order to prepare and clean
up the data before doing data analyzes.
So let's have the following task.
Identify duplicate rows in the table
orders archive and return a clean result
without any duplicates. So not only we
have to identify the duplicates, we have
to return no duplicates in our results.
So let's see how we can do this. Let's
first select the data. So select star
from sales orders archive. So let's go
and execute. So now by looking to the
data you can see that we have
duplicates. We have an issue. So the
order ID number four is twice in our
database. It doesn't make sense, right?
It should be only one. So which one is
the correct one? If you check the data
over here, you can see that this order
is shipped and then delivered. So it
looks like the last one is the correct
one. So how we can do that? If you just
scroll to the right, you can see that we
have a creation time. And we usually use
such a time stamp in order to identify
what was the last valid like order. And
here we can see immediately that this
order time is higher than the previous
one. Which means this is the more up to
date, right? The more current. So what
we're going to do, we're going to go and
rank our data for each order ID and sort
the data by the creation time in order
to find the last inserted or created row
for this order. So let's see how we can
do that. What we going to do? We're
going to go over here and say let's have
a row number and then over and what
we're going to do, we're going to
partition by the primary key. So
partition by order ID and as we said we
have to order the data by this time stab
at the end. So partition by or order by
creation time and descending. So we want
the highest then the lowest. So that's
it. Let's call it Rn and execute the
query. So now by checking the data if
everything is clean and we don't have
duplicates everything should be one
because maximum for each primary key we
should has one row. So but you can see
over here we have here two and we have
here three two. So that means this is
indicator that we have duplicates inside
our data. So now by checking one by one
as you can see the order ID is only one.
So we have the rank one the second one
as well we have the rank one but here we
have the issue. So as you can see we
have now two ranks for the order ID
four. So now which one is the correct in
our logic? We say it is the last row
that is inserted inside our data and
this is rank number one. So if you
scroll to the right side you can see
that the creation time here is higher
than the second one. So with that we
have identified what we want. We want
the last inserted row for each ID. And
now let's check this over here. So here
we have it three times. So it says the
first one is the highest creation date.
So if you go to the right side and now
by comparing those time stamps you can
see that this record the first one is
the la latest one that is inserted
inside our data. So as you can see this
one is the one that we need the other
two we don't need it because it is old
informations. So now everything that
doesn't has the rank number one is not
valid. It's something old and it's
actually bad data quality. So we want to
remove it or not to select it. So now in
order to have a clean data what we going
to do we're going to go and select the
following as sub select. So select star
from the table and now we are interested
only with the rank number one. We don't
need anything else. So let's go and
execute. And now if you check the
results you can check the order ID over
here. It is unique. We don't have any
duplicates. Right? 1 2 3 4 5 6 7. There
is no duplicates at all. And we have now
only the latest inserted data inside the
orders. and we don't have any duplicates
or data quality issue. So now of course
now we can go with this results in order
to do for the analyzes and this is
exactly what data engineers usually do
clean up the data and prepare the data
before doing any data analyzes. And of
course if you want to communicate those
data quality issues to the source of the
data let's say you are not the owner of
those informations. You can generate a
list of all bad data quality issues and
you can send it to the source system and
tell them to clean it up from the
sources. So now in order to select the
bad data what we're going to do is we
can just change here the condition and
say if it is higher than one then you
are like bad data. So let's go and
execute this. And now with this we have
in the results all records that
shouldn't exist in the data in the first
place. So we can go and export it and
communicate it to the source and tell
them check here you have something wrong
in your system and those information
should not be inserted in the data. So
everyone it is very strong right? It is
very powerful. I use it a lot in my
projects. There are many use cases for
the row number function in SQL. We can
do it in order to find the top end
analyzes, the bottom end analyzes, the
best performance, worst performance and
as well we can assign unique ids to do
benating or we can use it in order to
discover data quality issues to clean up
our data. So it is amazing function in
SQL and you're going to use it a lot. So
that's it for the three functions ro
number, rank and dense rank. Now we're
going to talk about the
inile. Okay. So what is inile? Intile in
SQL is very simple. It's going to go and
divide your rows, your data into
specific number of almost equal groups
or sometimes we call them packets. So
now in order to understand this and how
it scale works with this function, we're
going to have a very simple example. So
let's go. Okay, we have the following
setup. We have four rows for sales and
we would like to divide it into two
groups or into two buckets. So in order
to do that we can use the entile
function. It has different syntax than
the other ranking functions. So it
starts with entile then we must define a
number. So we cannot leave it empty like
the other ranking. So here we have two
buckets then over and here again we have
to sort the data. So it is must order by
sales descending from the highest to the
lowest. So now as usual SQL going to go
and sort the data. We have it already
sorted in this example. Then it going to
start assigning each of those rows into
buckets. But SQL first has to calculate
the bucket size. So how many rows we can
like insert inside each bucket. So the
calculation is very simple. It says the
bucket size equals to the number of rows
divided by the number of buckets. So
what is the number of rows here? We have
four rows, right? So we have four over
here. Then the number of buckets we
define it in the syntax of the query. So
here we defined two buckets. We need two
groups. So that means we are dividing
four by two. And the size of the bucket
going to be two. So now with this SQL is
ready and going to start assigning each
row to a bucket. So it's going to start
on the top. The first one going to be in
the bucket number one. Then go to the
next one. It's going to say okay we
still have enough space in the bucket.
Right? So it's going to sign as well to
one. But with this we reach the maximum
number of rows within each bucket. So
the next row going to be assigned to
another bucket. So it's going to be two
and the last one going to be as well
too. So as you can see it's very simple.
We have just assigned our sales based on
the sorting of course into two buckets.
These two sales belongs to the bucket
number one and the other two belongs to
the bucket number two. Very easy. So
that was very straightforward because we
are dividing even numbers and we got
perfectly sized buckets. But now what
going to happen if we have an odd
number? So we have here five instead of
four. So the bucket size going to be
dividing five by two. We're going to get
2.5. And now of course SQL will not go
and divide like two half for each
bucket. Then we are splitting this into
two packets. Of course this will not be
working. We should has now a bucket with
three and another bucket with two. So
now the rule in SQL make it very clear.
It says larger groups comes first then
smaller. So that means if we have here
an even number like this, the larger
group going to be the first group. So
that's going to look like this. It's
going to like reset everything. So let's
see what's going to happen. The first
one going to be one. The second one has
bill one. The third one going to be as
well one. So it going to has a larger
package than the second one. Then the
rest going to be two. So as you can see
the larger group comes first then the
smaller. And this is how a scale going
to work. if you have odd numbers. So you
don't have here perfectly sized buckets.
You have approximately or roughly
equally sized buckets. So this is how
the intel works. Now let's go back to
scale in order to practice this
function. Okay. So now let's have some
fun working with this function. So we
just going to select something like
order ID sales from sales orders. So
let's go and execute it. And with that
we got our 10 rows. Now let's say that I
would like to create only one bucket
from the data. So entile and only one
bucket over partition let's say not
partition by let's take order by sales
descending. So that's it. I'm going to
call it one bucket. So let's go and
execute it. As usual it's still going to
go and sort the data and then calculate
the bucket. It's going to be 10 rows
divided by one. So the size of the
bucket going to be 10. So that's why
you're going to see everywhere here as
one because all those rows going to fit
into one bucket. So this is very simple.
We have only one bucket. Let's go and
now have two buckets. So I'm just going
to copy and paste. And instead of one,
we're going to have two and let's call
it two buckets. So let's go and execute
this. So now here again, what is the
size of the buckets? It is 10 divided by
two. So we will get perfectly grouped
buckets. So the first bucket going to be
five rows and the second one going to be
the next five rows. So it is very
perfect. Let's go to the next one. Let's
have three buckets. So three. So let's
go and execute. So now what going to
happen is going to go and divide 10 by
three in order to get the size of the
bucket. And it's going to be 3.3. So it
is decimal and we will not get perfectly
sized buckets. So again the larger group
comes first then the smaller. So as you
can see we have to fit then in the first
group four in order to get the others
with three. So that's why the first
bucket is going to be the biggest one.
So four rows into the first bucket. Then
the second three rows going to be in the
bucket two. And as well the last one
going to be bucket three. So as you can
see the largest group is going to be the
first bucket. So now let's keep playing
with the data. Let's go and take now
four. We would like to have four
buckets. Now things going to get
interesting. So now by checking the
result it's going to be interesting. SQL
going to divide 10 by four and we will
get something like 2.5. So again we will
not get perfectly sized groups. So SQL
has to fit now 10 rows into four groups.
So the first three rows going to be fit
in the bucket number one and as well the
second three rows like this going to be
in the bucket number two. And then you
can see over here we have two buckets
with a size of two. And with that we can
fit 10 into four groups. And again you
can see the larger groups comes first
like this one and then the second and
the smallers comes later. Okay. So this
is how the inter works in SQL. And now
you might say you know what why do I
need buckets in the first place. So what
is the use
case? There is two use cases for the
intel function in my projects. In one
hands if I am data analyst I'm going to
use the intel function in order to
segment my data. In the other hand, if
I'm data engineer, I'm going to use the
intel function in order to do ETL
processing and as well to do load
balancing. So now let's start with the
first use case as a data analyst where
you want to do segmentations with the
entire function. Segmentations is very
nice way in order to understand your
data. So you can go and segment your
data into different buckets or groups
like for example doing segmentations for
the customers. So you can go and group
up your customers depend on their
behavior like the total sales or the
total number of orders. So with that you
can make like for example VIB section
and then the medium and then the low. So
now in order to understand the
segmentation use case let's have the
following task. Okay. The task says
segment all orders into three categories
high medium and low sales. So in order
to solve this let's do the basic stuff
right. So select order ID. Let's take
the sales from our table sales orders
and let's go and execute it. So as usual
we got our 10 sales. So now if you check
the task it says we need three
categories. So that means we need three
buckets right and it says high, medium
and low sales. So that means we are
dividing by the sales. So let's go and
do it step by step. So we're going to
use inile since we need to segment the
data. Three categories means three
buckets. And then let's define the
window over we don't have to divide the
data by partition by we just need to
sort it first by the sales. So it's
going to be by sales and let's take
discrete since we want to sort it from
the highest to the lowest. So that's it.
Let's say you are our buckets. So let's
go and execute this. So now if you check
the data you can see that they are
segmented into three buckets. So the
first bucket going to contain all orders
with the high sales. Then the second one
going to be all sales with the medium.
And then the last one going to be all
sales with the low sales. So as you can
see we have already categorized our data
into three groups. But now as you can
see we have numbers and maybe the user
is expecting to have those text high,
medium, low. So that means what we're
going to do now we're going to go and
translate those numbers into text into
words. And of course we cannot do that
inside the window function. We're going
to use data transformation using the
case when statements. Don't worry about
it. We're going to have complete
dedicated section explaining the case
when. So for now just follow me in order
to see how this works. We're going to go
and use subquery. So it's going to be
select and let's take the star for
everything and then let's have the
following logic. Case when buckets equal
to one then it is high the sales is
high. So we are just mapping the numbers
into text. So otherwise case when the
brackets equal to two then we are
targeting the medium medium and then the
last group packets equal to three then
those sales are low. So let's call it
end it and let's call it sales
segmentations. So that's it. Let me just
make it a little bit smaller in order
for you to see it. And all right so from
and then we have our subquery like this.
So as you can see we just mapped the
numbers into text. We are just doing
translations. So let's go and execute
it. And now by checking the results we
got our three categories for the users.
So the first category going to be the
high sales. The second one going to be
the medium sales and the third one going
to be the low sales. So guys you see
Intel is very powerful in order to
segment our data. So now you can go and
segment stuff like the customers by
their total sales or the products by
prices, employees by their salaries and
so
on. All right. So this is the first use
case for the Intel function as a data
analyst where you go and segment your
data in order to understand the
behavior. Now in the other hand, if you
are data engineer, you can use Intel
function in order to do load balancing
in your ETL. So now I'm just going to
explain it in very simple sketch. All
right. So now we have the following
scenario where we have two databases and
we would like to move one big table from
the database A to database B. So in this
case I'm doing something called full
load. That means I'm loading all the
rows from one database to another. So if
you do it in one go what could happen is
that it could take long time. So it
could take hours or even sometimes days
and maybe at the end you will get maybe
some network errors because you have
stressed the networks between those two
databases and everything going to break
and you're going to lose the data and
you have to start again. So now instead
of loading this table in one go what we
can do we can go and split it into
fractions or let's say packets. So we
can split this table for example into
four small tables using the function
entile. So now after we split this big
table into small tables, we're going to
go and start moving those small tables
one after another and with that we are
not stressing the networks and it's
going to succeed. So now after loading
everything at the end in the target
database we're going to have those small
tables and of course we can go and use
the union in order to merge them in
order to have again the big table that
we have it in the original database. So
this is very common use case for the
entile in order to split the load and to
balance the processing of extracting
data. All right. So now we have the
following SQL task. It says in order to
export the data divide the orders into
two groups. So let's go and do that.
First we're going to select everything
from the table just in order to see the
data sales orders. So let's go and
execute it. So now we got our 10 orders
and what we have to do is that to go and
split it into two groups. In order to do
that we can use the entile function. Two
groups means two buckets. So let's
define the window. So here we don't have
to partition the data using partition by
but we have to specify the order by. So
now which column we're going to use in
order to sort the data. Of course here
there is no rule like you can go and
split the data by sales or by the order
status by date by anything you want. But
we usually go and use the primary key.
It's just systematic, better, and more
clean, especially if you have a sequence
of numbers in the order ID. So you can
export the first range of the orders,
then you can go to the next group and so
on. So let's go with the order ID and
let's give it a name buckets. So that's
it. Let's go and hit execute. Now, as
you can see, it's very simple. We got
our two groups. So this is the first
batch of of the data and this is the
second batch of data. So now we can go
and select the first batch and export
it, import it in the next system. And
then after that we go with the second
batch. And of course if you still suffer
from the size of those packets, you can
go and split it to more smaller size. So
you can go over here and make it four.
So with that we're going to get smaller
buckets and it might be easier to export
the data. So this is really great use
case for the entile function. All right
everyone. So with this you have learned
the two use cases for the entile
function that I usually follow in my
projects. So as a data analyst you can
use it in order to do segmentations and
as a data engineer you can use it in
order to do load balancing of the
ETL. Okay everyone so with that we have
covered everything about the integer
based ranking functions. Now we're going
to talk about the second methods. We
have the percentagebased ranking
functions and here we have two functions
the cubist and as well the percentile.
So now let's have a quick recap. So with
the percentage based ranking SQL going
to go and calculate a relative position
as a percentage and assign it for each
row. So the output going to be a
continuous normalized scale from 0 to
one. And this is really amazing in order
to do distribution analyszis. So those
functions going to consider in their
calculation the overall total the whole
size of the data set which can help us
in order to find out the contribution of
each value to the overall total. And now
in SQL in order to generate the
percentage we have two different
formulas. So in one hand we have the
function cumist and in the other hand we
have the percent rank. So that means we
have two different functions with
different formulas in order to generate
and calculate the percentage. So now
let's start with the first function the
cumist. All right everyone. So now let's
start with the first function. We have
the dis and it stands for
commumulative distribution. It's going
to go and focus or calculate the
distribution of your data points within
a window. So what this means in order to
understand it, we're going to go and
have very simple example to understand
how SQL works with this function. So
let's go. All right. Again we have our
very simple example of the sales and we
have the following query. So dist
then we don't give any argument inside
it. So it's going to be empty and the
window going to be like usual order by
sales descending from the highest to the
lowest and the order by is must. So the
first step is SQL going to go and sort
the data. We have it already sorted from
the highest to the lowest. So now the
next step is that SQL going to go and
start calculating the percentage for
each row. And we have a very simple
formula. It says the cumist equals to
the position number of the value divided
by the number of rows. So now the next
step is still going to go and start
calculate the percentage for each row.
And we have this very simple formula. It
says the cubist equals to the position
number of the value divided by the
number of rows. It's very simple. Let's
do it step by step. So SQL going to
start with the first value in our list.
So it going to be calculated like this.
So what is the position number of the
first value? It's going to be one,
right? So this is the first value in our
list. And what is the total number of
rows? We have five rows, right? So 1 2 3
4 5. So we're going to divide one by
five. And the result going to be 0.2. So
this going to be the first value for the
first row. Okay. So now SQL going to go
to the next row. And this time we're
going to get a special case. As you can
see, we have the 80 twice. So we have
here a tie. So now first we need the
position number. As you can see, we are
at the position number two, right? But
since we have the 80 multiple times, SQL
going to go and take the last position
that we see the value 80 and the last
position going to be the record number
three. So that's why SQL going to say
for this record it's going to be the
position number three and not two and
then it's going to go and divide it by
five and we will get the value of 0.6.
So this is the most confusing thing with
this function. So if SQL finds a tie, it
will completely ignore the current
position number. So we don't have two.
It going to go and take the last
position number for the same value. And
the last in our list going to be the
record number three. So that's why we
have three over here. Okay. So now let's
keep moving. Let's go to the third row.
And as you can see, we are again in the
tie. But this time, this is the last
time we see 80. So next we don't have
80. So what's going to happen? We're
going to have exact same result. So it's
going to be 3 divided by 5. So as you
can see if we have a tie they going to
share the same percentage. So that means
with the cube list if you have same
values they going to share the same
rank. So let's keep moving to the fourth
one. So now what is the position number
of the 50 we are at the record four. So
position number four divided by five we
will get 0 comma 8. Okay. So now let's
move to the last one and it is the
easiest one. So which position do we
have over here? It is the position
number five. It's the last one. And the
number of rows is five. That's why we
will get one. So guys, that's it. This
is how the cumulative distribution
works. Once you understand the formula,
it's going to be very easy in order to
understand the output. So as you can
see, calculating the percentage always
depends on the total size of our data
sets. You can see here the number of
rows. So with this we're going to get an
output that help us in order to
understand the distribution of our data
points within the data
sets. All right everyone. So now we're
going to go and focus on the second
function that generate percentage as a
rank. We have the percent rank. So the
percent rank going to go and focus on
generating the relative position of each
row within a window. So in order to
understand what this means, we can have
a very simple example in order to
understand how scale works with this
function. So let's go. Okay, again we
have those sales very simple example and
the syntax going to be like this percent
rank and inside it we don't use any
arguments and the window going to be
like this order by it is a must sales
descending from the highest to the
lowest the first step that is going to
do is that it's going to go and sort the
data from the highest to the lowest and
we have it already like this and next
SQL going to go and start calculate the
percentage which is very similar to the
cumulative distribution but this time
it's going to be like this position
number then we subtract it from one and
as well divided by the number of rows
subtracted from one. So it's like exact
formula but we are only subtracting here
once for both numbers. Okay. So now
let's go through all rows step by step
and see the output. So it's still going
to start with the first row right. So
what is the position number of the first
row? It's going to be one. Then we have
to subtract it by one. That's why we
will get zero. Now what is the total
number of rows? So we have here five
rows and it is subtracted by one that's
why we're going to get four. So now 0
divided by any value the output going to
be a zero. So that's why for the first
value we will get a zero. All right. So
now let's move to the second row over
here. And here we have our special case
where we have a tie. So we have two
sales sharing the same value 80. So now
for the percent rank SQL gonna have
different behavior than the cumist.
Remember in the list SQL did search
for the last position of the shared
value. So it was the position number
three since this is the last time we see
80. But now with the person rank is
still going to stick with the first
occurrence of the shared value. So now
by checking those two 80s what is the
first occurrence? It is the record
number two. So that's why we have
position number two subtracted by one we
will get one. And here the same going to
be number of totals we have five
subtract by one we have four. So now if
you divide one by four we will get the
result of 0 comma 25. So this is the
percentage of this value. So now let's
go to the second row. Here we have again
the tie. So scale going to stick with
the position number two the first
occurrence. So it's going to be the same
two subtracted by one we will get one.
And as well the total number of rows
five subtract by one we will have four.
That's why we will get the same exact
results. So here as you can see with the
percent rank it's like the list the
shared value going to share as well the
same percentage rank. Now let's move to
the fourth one. So we have the value 50.
So what is the position of this? It's
going to be the record number four.
Subtract it by one we will get three.
And if you divide three by four you will
get
0.75. And now moving to the last value
over here it's going to be easy. So what
is the position number of the 30? It is
five. Five subtracted by one it's going
to be four. And as well we're going to
have four as well here for the total
numbers subtracted by one. So if you
divide four by four you will get one. So
that's it guys. This is how the percent
rank works. It always has the scale from
0 to one. So it's always like this.
Doesn't matter which values do we have
inside and it's going to has like
continuous scale. And again here if you
have a tie they're going to go and share
the same percentage rank. Okay guys. So
now if you go and compare those two
functions you're going to see that they
are really similar to each others. The
output of both functions we are
generating percentage based ranking and
both of them as well handling the ties
perfectly. So they share the same
percentage rank. If you check the syntax
they are very similar. And now by
checking the formulas of both of them we
are always considering the overall size
of the data sets. So here the size is
considered in the calculation to help us
finding the relative position of each
value to the overall and this is very
important in the analyszis in order to
measure the contribution of each value
to the overall. So now about the use
cases if you want to focus on the
distribution of your data points go with
the cumulative distribution but if you
want to focus on the relative position
of each rows then go with the percent
rank. All right. So now there is one
more difference between the and the
percent rank and that's if you check the
formulas. You can see that the is
more inclusive. We always consider the
position number of the current row. But
with the person rank we don't consider
the current row. We like skip it or make
it exclusive. So we say for the person
rank it is more exclusive and the
cumulative distribution it is more
inclusive. So now if you ask me the hard
question which one to use, I'm going to
say if you want to be more inclusive, go
with the commutive distribution. If you
want to be more exclusive with the
current row, go with the person rank. So
they are very similar to each others. So
if you want to calculate the
distribution of your data, go with the
cumulative distribution. If you want to
find the relative position of each row,
then go with the percent rank. All
right. So now we have the following task
that says find the products that fall
within the highest 40% of the prices.
Let's go and solve this. Now we are
targeting the table products and I will
just select like two columns products
price from sales products. So that's it.
Let's go and execute this. So now as you
can see we got five products and their
prices. And the task says find the
highest 40%. So we have to find and
generate a percentage rank. In order to
do that we have the two functions cumist
and the percent rank. I will go this
time with the list. So let's go and
do that. So list and then let's go
and define the window like this. It's
going to be order by we are targeting
now the prices right? So order by the
price from the highest to the lowest and
let's go give it a name this rank. So
let's go and execute this. So now with
that SQL going to go and generate for us
a percentage ranking using the formula
that we just learned before. So now in
the output we are getting all the
products but the task says we have to
get only the products that are in the
highest 40%. So that means the first row
the second row and that's it. So those
rows are in the highest 40% the rest are
below that. So in order to do that to
filter the data we're going to use the
subquery. So select star from and then
we have our sub query like this and then
our filter going to be this rank smaller
or equal to 0.4. So this is our
threshold in order to get the data. So
let's go and execute this. And now as
you can see we got the top products the
top 40%. Now of course you can go and
format the percentage. We can do that
like this. So let's take the test
rank multiply it with 100. So let's go
and execute this. So as you can see we
got 20 and 40%. We can go and add to it
as well the percentage character right.
So we can go and say concat and we're
going to add the character after that
like this and let's call it test rank
percentage. So that's it. Let's go and
execute it. So that we have solved the
task. We have the products that fall
within the highest 40%. Now, of course,
you can go and try the percent rank. So,
it's very simple. We just have to go and
switch the cumulative distribution with
the function percent bank. So, let's go
and execute it. Now, as you can see, we
will get the exact same results. So,
we're still getting the gloves and caps
as the highest products within the 40%
of the price. So, guys, that's it. It's
very simple, right?
All right friends, so now let's have a
quick recap for the window ranking
functions. So what they're going to do,
they're going to go and assign a rank
for each row within a window. And we
have two types of ranking, right? The
first one is the integer based ranking.
It's going to go and assign a number an
integer for each row. And here we have
four functions. Row number, rank, dense
rank, and in tile. And the second type
of ranking, we have the percentage based
ranking. So scale fair is going to go
and calculate a rank and then assign it
for each row. And here we have two types
of formula or functions. So we have the
cube dist the cumulative distribution
and the second one we have the percent
rank. And now to the next point if we
are talking about the rules of the
syntax. So the expression should be
empty. We should not pass any argument
to the functions. We must use order by
in order to sort our data. So it is
required and the frame clause are not
allowed to use. So you cannot go and
customize a frame within the window
function. And as we learned there are
many use cases for the ranking
functions. For example, we have the top
end analyzes the button end analyzes in
order to identify our top performers or
the worst performers in our business.
Another use case using the row number we
can identify and remove duplicates in
our data. So we can use it in order to
find data quality issues and as well to
improve the quality. And another use
case if our table don't have a clean
primary key we can go and generate
unique ids using the row number in order
to do as well by generating one more use
case it was the data segmentations you
can use the intel in order to segment
your customers your products employees
and so on and another use case we can do
data distribution analysis as we learned
we can use the cubeist in order to
understand the data distributions of our
data points compared to the overall and
the last use case it's more for data
engineering we can use the intel
function in order to equalize the
loading process of our ETLs. So as you
can see there are many use cases for the
ranking functions. Okay, so that's all
about how to rank your data using the
window functions and now we're going to
cover the last group. We will learn
about the value window functions. How to
access another records. So let's
go. All right everyone. So now we have
this very simple example. We have the
months and the sales. Now we can use the
value functions in order to access a
value from another row. So in order to
understand it let's say that SQL now
processing the months and we are
currently at the month of March. So now
for example I would like to access the
value from the previous month from
February. So in order to do that we can
use the lag function in order to get the
value of 10. So with that we have in the
same row the current sales of the month
March and as well the sales from the
previous month the February. And maybe
in other cases I would like to get the
sales of the next month from April. In
order to do that we can use the function
lead and we will get at the same row the
value five. So now I can very quickly
compare the current month with the
previous month and as well with the next
month. And now in the other cases you
might be interested in the first month
of your list. So it's going to be here
January. So in order to get the sales of
the first month you can use the function
first value. So we're going to get at
the same row 20. And now for the last
option I think you already get it. We
can go and get the value of sales of the
last month. So here we can get the July.
So for that we're going to use the
function last value and we will get the
value of 40. So this is exactly the
purpose of the value functions or
analytical functions. We can access a
value from another rows. And here is
really important to understand as well
the value functions is like the ranking
functions. We have to use the order by
in order to sort the data in order to
understand what is the first row and the
last row. In this example, the data is
sorted by the month. So guys, the access
functions are really important for
analytics. You can use it in order to
access a value from other rows in order
to do comparison. All right. Right. So
now let's have a quick overview of the
syntax and the rules for the value
functions. So here we have four
functions lead, lag, first value and
last value. So as you can see we can
group them into two groups. So we have
the lead and lag. They are very similar
to each others. Especially with the
syntax we can use three things or three
arguments inside it. Expression offset
default for both of them. For the first
value we can use only an expression. So
that means we have to pass a value for
those functions. You cannot leave it
empty. So now about the expression data
type, you can use any field with any
data type. There is no restrictions
about only for example using numbers.
Any data type is allowed. Now about the
definition of the window. The partition
by as usual is optional like any other
group. The order by here is a must. You
must define an order by. It's like the
ranking. So here you cannot leave it
empty. And now we come to the last one.
We have the frame clause. There are
really different stuff over here. So for
the first two functions lead and lag you
are not allowed to define any frame. So
you are not allowed to define any subset
of data. It's very similar to the
ranking. So you must use order by but
you cannot define the frame of the
window. But for the other two functions
the first value and the last value they
are optional. You can go and use them.
And for the last value it is recommended
to define frame close. Don't worry about
it. We're going to have enough examples
in order to understand. So as you can
see those functions has different
requirements. So there is no generic
rule for all of them. But one thing that
they all agree on that you must use
order by. So now as usual what we're
going to do we're going to go and deep
dive into those functions. We're going
to address first the two functions lead
and lag because they are very similar to
each others. We're going to understand
the use cases when to use them and of
course we're going to practice in SQL.
So let's go.
lead and lag functions. The lead
function can allow you to access a value
from the next row within a window where
the lack function is exactly the
opposite. It's going to allow you to
access a value from a previous row
within a window. It sounds very easy,
right? So let's understand how is SQL
going to execute those functions. Okay.
So now let's have a quick overview of
the syntax for both of the functions
lead and lag. We have here very simple
example for the lead function. So as
usual we start with the function name.
It's going to be the lead. And now after
that we're going to go and pass the
arguments. And as you can see we have
here multiple stuff. So let's do it step
by step. So the first thing is that
we're going to go and specify an
expression. And the data type could be
any data type. It could be a number like
here the sales. It could be a character
like names or dates or anything. So this
is required. We have to specify an
expression. We cannot leave it empty.
And we can use any data type. Now moving
on to the next one. We have here a
number. So what is this? This is the
offset and this offset is optional. So
you can go and skip it. So what offsets
means? What we are doing over here? We
are specifying for SQL the number of
rows forward or backward from the
current row. So here in this example we
are specifying the offset as two using
the lead. And with that we are telling
SQL go jump to the next two rows and get
me the value. And if you are using lag
it means you are telling SQL go back two
rows up and get me the value. So here
you are telling SQL how many rows it
needs to jump and if you don't specify
anything like leave it empty SQL going
to go and use a one. So the default of
this with the offsets going to be one if
you don't specify anything. All right
moving on to the last one and to the
third one. This is as well optional. You
can go and leave it empty. So here it is
the default value. Now what happens with
those functions is that sometimes SQL
jump to the next two rows or something
like that and SQL doesn't find anything.
So there is no more rows available to
access and with that SQL going to go and
return a null. So that means if SQL goes
to the next rows or go to the previous
rows and doesn't find anything SQL as a
default going to go and return a null.
So if you don't specify anything over
here in those scenarios you will have a
null values as a return from the whole
function. But in some scenarios you
don't want to have a null you would like
to have a value. So here you are
defining the default value. So it should
not be a null, it should be a 10. So
scale if you don't find anything return
a 10. Don't return a null. So again
guys, the default values, the offsets,
all those informations are optional for
you in order to configure it. But you
should know the default if you don't use
anything for the offset is going to be
one for the default value going to be
null. But you must specify an
expression. So here you cannot leave it
empty. All right. So that's all about
the arguments that you can pass to the
lead or lag functions. Then the next
stuff are the standard stuff. So we have
the overclos then we have the partition
by as usual partition by is optional.
And then to the order by those functions
it's like the rank functions. It
requires you to sort the data. So it is
a must to sort the data otherwise will
not know what is the next row what are
the previous rows. So we have to sort
the data. It is required. You cannot
skip this. So it is not optional. All
right. So the syntax is not crazy right?
We have the usual stuff but only we can
go and configure the default value and
the offsets. Okay guys, now we have very
simple example. We have months and sales
and we're going to go and understand how
the SQL works for both of the functions
lead and lag side by side. So now in the
first example we are interested in the
sales of the next month. So in order to
do that we're going to use the lead
function. So lead and then we're going
to specify the argument. It is the
sales. We want the value of sales and
then we define the window like this
order by month. So it's going to be
ascending. And now in the right side
we're going to be interested in the
sales of the previous months. So in
order to do that we're going to use the
lag function. So it's going to be very
similar to the lead. We have lag and
then the sales since we are interested
in the sales and we're going to sort the
data by the month. So now let's see how
going to do it step by step and side by
side. So going to start with the first.
So now let's see how skill going to
process those informations side by side
and row by row. So it's going to start
with the first row over here. What is
the next month of January? It is
February and we are interested in the
sales of this row. So SQL going to take
the value from the next row and we're
going to have the value of 10. So now by
looking through the January we can see
the sales of the next month of February
in the same row. So now let's check the
right side over here. Now we are
interested in the previous month. So
what is the previous month of the first
row? It will be nothing. Right? So we
cannot point it with anything. That's
why going to say this is null. There is
no previous month for the current row.
And we're going to have it as a null.
Okay. So now it's going to go to the
next row. We are at February. What is
the next month? It's going to be March.
And it's going to point to it. So we
will get the 30 as the sales of the next
month of March. And on the right side,
what is the previous month of February?
It's going to be January, right? So,
it's going to get the value the sales of
the previous month. And here we will get
20. So, as you can see, it's very
simple. On the lead, we are always
checking the next values. On the lag, we
are always checking the previous value.
So, let's keep going. We are currently
at March. What is the next month? It's
going to be April. So, it's going to go
and point to it like this. and we will
get the sales of the next month April.
For the March on the right side, what is
the previous month? It is February.
Right? So, it's going to go and point to
February. So, we will get the sales of
10. And now, interesting to the last row
over here. You can see that we are at
April. What is the next month of April?
There is nothing because we are at the
end of our table, right? So, since there
is no month after that, we will get a
null in the output. But for the lag, we
still have a previous month for April.
So what is the previous month? It is
March. And we will get the sales of the
March. So it's going to be 30. So that's
it guys. It's really simple, right? It's
just like they are doing the opposite
things. So now if you check those values
side by side, you can see that with the
lead, we will always get a value for the
first row, but for the last row, it can
be always empty because there is no next
value. We are at the end of the table.
But if you check the lag for the first
value, we will always get a null because
there is no previous value or previous
record from the first row. And for the
last record, as you can see, we're
always going to get a value because we
will have a previous value. Okay, let's
move on in order to understand how scale
this time works with the offsets and the
default value. So now we have the same
data, but we have different task. So now
on the left side, we would like to get
the sales of two months ahead. So it's
not the next month, it's going to be two
months. And we would like to tell SQL if
you don't find any value don't return
null return for us is zero. So this is
going to be our default. Now if you
check the syntax it's going to be exact
like before but we are adding now an
offset of two because we are interested
in two months ahead and we are
specifying here a default value zero. So
if you don't find anything put zero
don't put null. Now on the right side we
have the exact opposite. We are
interested in the sales of two months
ago. So we are not interested in the
direct previous month we need the sales
of two months ago. And here the same
thing if you don't find anything don't
return null give us a zero. So as you
can see we have the same syntax but
using the function lag. So now let's
understand how going to execute this
step by step and side by side. So going
to start with the first month January.
So now SQL going to ask what is the
sales of two months ahead. So we are at
January. It will not be February it's
going to be the month of March. So it's
going to go and point it like this and
we will get the value of 30. So 30 is
the sales of two months ahead. And now
on the right side we are as well at
January. It's going to ask the question
what is the sales of two months ago. So
we don't have any previous data. Right?
So we will not get anything. It's going
to return null but it's going to check
do we have a default value? Well yes. So
this time HQL will not return null. It's
going to return the default value. And
this time it's going to be zero. All
right. All right. So now let's go to the
next value. We are currently at
February. What is the sales of two
months ahead? So it will not be March,
it's going to be April. So it's going to
go and point it like this and we will
get the value of five. So now on the
right side we are currently at February.
Now the question is what is the sales of
two months ago? We have history. We have
the previous month but we don't have two
months in the history. That's why we
will still get zero as the output with
the default value. Okay. Okay. So now
let's keep going to the next value. We
are currently at March. SQL going to ask
what is the sales of the two months
ahead. We have only one month after that
but we don't have two months. That's why
SQL will not find anything and it's
going to return null but it's going to
go and use the default. So here we're
going to go and get the value of zero.
There is no more data available in the
table. But now on the right side we are
currently at March and we are asking
what is the sales of two months ago. So
now we have enough history in the past
and it's going to get the value of 20.
All right. So now let's go to the last
month over here in our table. April.
What is the sales of two months ahead?
We don't have any data. So it's going to
be zero as well. But now on the right
side, we are currently at April. What is
sales of two months ago? We have enough
history. That's why SQL going to get and
point it like this. So we will get the
February going to be 10. So that's it.
This is how SQL works with the lead and
lag using offsets and as well default
value. Let's go back in SQL in order to
practice those two
functions. Okay, so now we have the
following task and it says analyze the
month over month performance by finding
the percentage change in sales between
the current and the previous month. So
that means we have to go and compare the
current month with the previous month.
So the main use case for the lead unlock
is to do comparison analyszis and we
have a very common use case it's called
time series analyzes. So it is the
method of analyzing our business our
data in order to understand the patterns
and trends over the time. And one of the
most important and classical question
that you're going to get from the
decision makers or business is to do
year-over-year analyszis or month over
month analyszis. So the year-over-year
analysis is going to help us in order to
understand the overall growth or decline
in the performance of our business over
the years over the time. But in the
other hand, we have month- over-month
analyszis in order to do shortterm
trends analyzes and as well discover the
patterns in the seasonality. So the main
focus is to understand the performance
of our business over the time. So now
let's go back to it in order to solve
the task. Okay guys, so now let's go and
do it step by step. Now what is the
first step? Before we go and compare
things together, we have to collect the
data. We have to do the calculations
first. So we have to find out first the
total sales for the current month and
then the total sales for the previous
month. And after that we can go and
compare them. So now let's start with
the easy stuff. We have to find out the
current sales for the current month. So
in order to do that, let's just do very
simple select. So what do we need? We
need let's take the order ID. Let's take
the order date because inside it we have
the month. Uh let's go and collect the
sales. So that's it for now from sales
orders. So let's go and execute this. So
now in the result we got the usual
stuff. We have 10 orders, sales and
order dates. But the order date is on
the level of the days and we are not
interested on the whole date. We would
like to get only the month in order to
calculate the total sales for the month.
Now we're going to go and use a function
in order to extract the month from a
date. Don't worry about it. We're going
to have a dedicated chapter in order to
show you how to deal with the dates
format in SQL. So now what we're going
to do, we will use a very simple
function called month and order dates.
And let's call it order month. So that's
it. Let's go and execute it. Now, as you
can see, we got a new field where we
have only the month of informations. So
here we have January, February, and
March. So now the next step is that we
want to find the total sales for each
month. So what we're going to do, we're
going to go and use group by. So, let's
do that. We're going to go and say we
want the sum of sales. I'm just going to
call it current month sales. And let's
go and get rid of all those
informations. We're going to go and
group by the month, right? So, group by
and let's have the month. So, that's it.
Let's go and execute it. So, it's very
simple, right? We got now the three
months and the total sales of the
current month. So now with that we got
the first information that we need in
order to do the comparison. We have for
each row the total sales for the current
month. So now the next thing that we're
going to do is to find out the total
sales for the previous month like side
by side in the same row. And in order to
do that we have learned we can go and
use the lag function. So we're going to
go and integrate the lag window function
in the same group by. So we're going to
do it like this. So lag we are now
interested in the previous month. So
that's why we're going to go and get the
sum of sales as an expression inside it.
And after that we're going to define the
window. It's going to be like this over
and order by is a must. So we're going
to go and sort the data by the month.
Right? So let's go and do it. And with
that we have defined the previous month
sales. So you are the previous month
sales. So now let's go and execute it in
order to see the results. All right. So
now let's check the results. The first
row what is the previous month? There is
no previous month. We are at the first
record and the first month that's why we
have null. Now let's go to February.
What is the sales of the previous month
from January? It is 105. So this is
correct. And now to the last value to
the March. What is the sales of
February? The previous month it is 195.
So with that we got the two
informations. We have the current month
and as well the previous month. So guys
as you can see it's magic right? It's
very simple. we can go and use the lead
and lag functions in order to access
another values from another rows without
doing any complicated joins and so on.
Okay. So now what is the next step?
We're going to go and subtract the total
sales from the current month with the
previous month. So in order to do that
we're going to go and use a sub query
like this. So select star from and we're
going to have it like this as subquery.
And now the calculation is very simple.
Let me just move this a little bit down.
So it is the current month subtracted
from the previous month and let's go and
call it month over month change. So
that's it. Let's go and execute this. So
now let's go and check the results for
the first month. You can see that we
don't have any value and that is correct
because the previous month is empty. So
there is no change. And now moving on to
the February. You can see over here we
got plus 90. That means we have here
improvement in the performance of our
sales. Now moving on to the last one.
It's really bad. We have decline in our
performance. We can see that we have
minus 115. So that means the current
month is doing really bad compared to
the previous month. So the March is
really bad month. Okay. So now as you
can see in the output we got the
absolute numbers but the task says find
the percentage change. So we have to
convert this to a percentage and we can
do it like this. It's very simple. Let's
do it in a new column. Just going to
zoom out a little bit. So, it's going to
be the change the differences divided by
the previous month sales. And then let's
go and multiply it with 100 in order to
get the percentage. So, like this. And
now, as you can see, we got zeros. And
that's because those numbers are
integer. So, we have to go and cast one
of those values. Just going to do it for
the first. So, cast and float. So,
that's it. Let's go and execute it
again. Now the result looks better. We
have the percentages but we have a lot
of decimals. So let's go and round the
number to let's say one decimal. So only
one and let's give it a name. So you are
month over month percentage. So let's
execute. So now as you can see things
get better. And with that we have
calculated the percentage change in
sales between the current and the
previous months. And this is how we do
month overmonth analyszis.
All right. So now we have another use
case for the lead and lag function. We
can use them in order to do customer
retention analyzes. It's all about
measuring the customer behavior and
loyalty. So we are helping the business
and decision makers to build strong
relationship with the loyal customers
and for them as well to focus on their
needs. So now let's see how we can use
lead and lag function in order to do
customer retention analyszis. So let's
go. All right. Right. So now we have the
following task and it says in order to
analyze customer loyalty rank customers
based on the average days between their
orders. So there is a lot of things
going on over here. Let's do it step by
step. And I would like always to start
with a very simple select. So let's go
select informations like the order ID.
Let's get the customer ID and as well
since we want the days we would like to
have the date. So order dates from the
table sales orders and let's go and sort
the data. So order by customer ID and
order dates. So that's it. Let's go and
execute. So now as usual we got our 10
orders, the customers and when they did
order. So now let's check the task.
Let's solve this over here. Days between
their orders. So we have to find how
many days are between two orders. For
example, if we check the customer number
one over here, he did order around 10
January and the second order is like
after 10 days 20 January. So we have to
go and subtract those two dates. Now in
order to subtract those informations and
do calculations, we have to have
everything in the same row. So for
example, if we are at the first row over
here, I would like to have as well one
column about the next order. So the date
of the next order. So we have to access
a value from another row. Of course, we
can go and do joins, but we have lead
and lag functions. And for this
scenario, we're going to go and use the
lead window function. So let's go and do
that. I'm going to go and call the order
date over here as a current order. And
let's go and calculate the lead. So we I
would like to get the next order date.
So I would like to get this value over
here in the same row. That's why we this
time we're going to get the order dates.
And now let's go and define the window.
Now we have to go and partition the data
because we are analyzing each customers
separately, right? So that's why we have
to partition that by the customer ID.
And of course in order to do the lead,
we have to use the order by. So let's go
and define that as well. Order by and
it's going to be by the order date. So
now we have to give it a name. The order
date here is the current order. This
going to be the next order. So next
order. Let me zoom out a little bit and
make this smaller. So let's go and
execute it. So now as you can see in the
output we got a new column called next
order. And with that we got the current
order, the current row and as well the
value from the next row. So what is the
next row? It's going to be the 20
January. The same thing of course for
the next row. Over here we have the
current order date and the next order
date. So this value going to be exactly
as the next one over here 15 of February
and then since we are working with
window since this is the whole window
over here the last order for this
customer it's 15 of the February there
is no next order so this going to be
null the same thing if you check the
other customers you're going to see
always the last order don't have any
next order so looks like everything is
fine and for the last customer he has
only one order so now with this we got
all the informations for our
calculations. So we have the current
order and the next order in the same
row. Now we can go and subtract them in
order to get the days between those two
orders. And now in order to subtract
date we has to use the function date
div. Don't worry about those functions.
We're going to explain all those stuff
in the next chapters. So now just follow
me with those steps. What we're going to
do, we're going to go and subtract this
date the order date with the whole thing
over here. Right? So the whole thing
here is the next order. So let's do it
in a new line and it's going to be very
simple. So date diff we are finding the
differences between two dates. So the
syntax going to be like this. First we
have to define what we are talking
about. Are they days, months, years and
so on. So we have to tell SQL find me
the differences in days. Now we have to
specify two days. So the first one going
to be the order date. This is the
current date and the second date going
to be the whole thing from here. So
let's take it and put it side by side
and this calculation going to give us
number of days. So we're going to call
this days until next order. All right.
So now let's go and execute the whole
thing. So now let's check the result. As
you can see over here we got 10. So this
is 10 days between those two dates and
the next one we have around 26 days.
Here we have a null because we don't
have here a date and for the next one we
have 31 days. So we have a whole month
over here. So everything is working
perfectly and with that we have solved
only this part days between their
orders. So guys you see right this is
the magic of the lead and lag function.
We can very easily access any
information you need in the same row in
order to do such a important analyzis
and with very simple query. We are not
doing any crazy stuff like joining and
stuff. We are just specifying the lead
function. So now we got all the
informations that we need. Next we're
going to go and calculate the average of
those days. So in order to do that we
have to go and use a subquery. So let me
just zoom out. So let's go and select
star just prepare the subquery. So the
whole thing going to be a subquery. I'm
going just get rid of the order by it's
not now necessary. So let's me just put
it like this and shift it. So now what
do we need? We need the average of the
days. So we need the average of this
value. So what can we do? We're going to
go and use a group by. So customer ID
since we have to find the average for
each customers and we're going to get
this value and say average days until
the next order and we're going to call
it average days. So and we have here to
group by. So group by customer ID. So
like this just make this a little bit
smaller and zoom in here. So that's it.
Now we are just doing a very simple
average and group I statements. So let's
go and execute it. Now as you can see
it's going to go and aggregate the data.
So we have now only four customers and
for each customer we have the average
days between their orders. So now what
is missing in our task? If you check
over here it says rank the customers
based on this average. So we have to go
and use the rank function. So here again
another window function that we have to
go and use. We're going to do it
together with the group by. So let me
just make this a little bit smaller and
then let's do it over here. So I'm just
going to go with the rank function. Then
we're going to define the window like
this over order by and then we're going
to go and sort the data by the average
days. So that means we're going to go
and get this calculation over here and
put it as order by it's going to be
ascending. So we are focusing on the
lowest average days. So that's it. Let's
call it rank average. So now let's go
and execute this. So now by checking the
result, you can see now we have a
ranking for the average. And here skill
says that the number one customer or the
number one loyal customer is the
customer number four which is not really
correct because the number four we don't
have a lot of informations about this
customer he or she did order only once.
So either now you go and like filter the
data and remove this customer where you
say if the average is null then don't
put it in the rank or we can go and
replace this value with a very huge
value in order to make it at the end of
our list. For example, we can go over
here and replace the null with
qualisk like this. And we say if the
average is null, then let's say give me
a crazy number like this very huge one.
So that's it. Let's go and execute. And
now as you can see this customer going
to be at the end of our list. And now we
can see that the most loyal customer is
number one. And then the other two
customers are in the rank two. Here we
are sharing the same rank since we have
the same average. So guys with that we
have solved the task and we have ranked
the customers based on the average days
between their orders. So we have now a
really nice rank and we can understand
now the behavior of the customers and
maybe we have to go and focus on the
customer number one and understand her
or her needs. And of course the function
that helped us here in order to do such
a customer retention analyszis is the
lead function in order to find the next
order to calculate the days. So this is
how you use lead functions to do such a
use case.
the first value and the last value
functions. I think the name says
everything, right? So the first value
going to allow you to access a value
from the first row within a window where
the last value exactly the opposite. It
going to allow you to access a value
from the last row within a window. Easy,
right? So now let's understand how SQL
execute those functions. Okay. So now as
usual, we have this very simple example.
we have the months and sales and we have
it twice because we would like now to go
and compare side by side the two
functions first value and last value. So
now for the left sides we would like to
get the sales of the first month and on
the right sides we would like to get the
sales of the last month. So now for the
first task we can go and use the first
value. It's very simple. So the first
value function then the argument going
to be sales since we want the sales and
then the window going to be defined like
this order by month because we want to
get the first month. So as usual we must
use order by now on the right side in
order to get the sales of the last
months we can go and use the last value
right so the same things last value
sales over order by month. So as you can
see on the left and right we don't use
any frame definition but the default
going to be used from this. All right.
So now let's see how SQL going to
process both of those queries side by
side. So the first step is SQL going to
go and sort the data. They are already
sorted from the lowest to the highest.
And then the next step is going to start
row by row finding the first value on
the left side. So what is the unbounded
proceeding? It's going to be static and
always pointing to January. So this is
always going to be the unpounded
proceeding. We have it in both sides
like this. And what is the current row?
It's going to be at the start the first
row. And on the right side the same
things over here. So the window
definition going to be is only one row
right. So what is the first value in
this window? It is 20. Right? The same
things on the right side. What is the
last value in this window? It is as well
20. So we will get exactly same results.
Now let's move to the second row. So
it's going to be pointing to February.
And the frame definition going to be
here extended like this. So what is the
first value in this frame? It's going to
be as well 20. Right? So in the output
we're going to get 20. And now in the
right side the current row going to be
as well pointing to February and the
window going to go get extended. So now
what is the last value of this frame?
It's going to be 10. Now let's keep
going. We're going to go to the March
and the window going to get extended.
What is the first value? It's always
going to be the same. So 20 on the right
side window going to get extended. What
is the last value? It's going to be 30.
So as you can see the default definition
is always having the static start always
the same start of the subset and as we
are moving with the current row the
frame going to get extended. So now
moving to the last one and with that we
will get the whole data set inside the
frame and the first cell is going to be
20 on the right side. the same things
going to get extended like this and this
time the last one going to be April and
five. So now if you go and compare them
side by side you see that on the left
side the task is solved and everything
is working correctly right. So we have
for each row always the sales of the
first row and what is the first row it
is January. So we have everywhere a 20
which is correct. But now if you check
the right side you can see there is
something wrong right? We are getting
not the last value. We should always get
April right? We should have here
everywhere a five. So we have here
exactly the same result as the sales. So
it's really useless to use it like this,
right? And that's of course because SQL
is using the default definition of the
window frame. Last value is the only
function from all window functions that
you cannot use the default frame
definition. You have to go and customize
the frame definition in order to get the
effect of the last value. For the first
value, everything is working. If you're
using a default frame, if you are not
specifying anything, but for the last
value, you will not get the effect
correctly without customizing the frame
window. So my friends, you can go and
use the first value function like all
other window functions without defining
a frame. You can go with the default and
you will get the effect of the first
value, but the last value you have to go
and define a frame. So let's see how we
can solve that. All right. So now in
order to solve this, we going to define
the frame like this. It's going to be
the rows between the current row and the
unbounded following. So we just switch
things around. So now let's see how this
going to work. Now of course it's going
to go and sort the data and so on. Now
it's still going to have a pointer to
the unbounded following. So it's going
to point always to the last row in our
data set and then it's going to proceed
step by step. So the first row going to
be like this and the frame going to be
the whole thing, right? So from the
current row until the unbounded
following. So what is the last value the
last row? It's going to be the five,
right? The April. So we will get in the
output five. Now let's proceed to the
next value. The frame going to be
shorter and smaller. And what is the
last value? It's going to be as well the
five. Right? So now we jump to the next
one. And the frame going to be like
this. What is the last value? As well
five. And then we will get the last
value like this. Current row is equal to
the unbounded following. We have only
one row and it's going to be as well
five. So as you can see it's very simple
just fix the frame clause and you will
get the last value working as expected.
So this is how SQL going to go and do
it. Now let's go back to SQL and start
practicing. All right. So now we have
the following task. It says find the
lowest and highest sales for each
product. So now let's see how we can do
this. As usual we're going to start with
very simple select statement. So select
order ID. We need the product ID and as
well their sales. So let's select the
table sales orders. So that's it. Let's
go and select this. Now in the output we
got our orders, products and sales. So
now let's start with the first part of
the task. Find the lowest sales for each
product. So in order to do that, we can
use the first value function. So let's
go and do that. First value. Then what
we are talking about, we have to give an
expression. We need the lowest and
highest sales. So let's go and have the
sales inside it. And now we have to
define the window. So over since we are
saying for each product that means we
have to go and make windows. So we have
to divide the data using partition by
products ID. And then we must use an
order by right. So we have to go and
sort the data by the sales. Since the
first value should be the lowest value,
we have to do it as ascending from the
lowest sales to the highest sales. So
we're just going to leave it like this
as a default and we're going to call it
lowest sales. So let's go and execute
this. So now let's go and check our
results. First going to go and partition
the data by the product ID. So as you
can see we got now here four windows.
Then sort the data by the sales. So the
data are sorted from the lowest to the
highest from 10 to 90. So now what is
the first value of the sales? It is the
first row, right? So it's going to be
10. That's why we have everywhere a 10.
Let's check another one. Let's take this
one here. So this window has two rows
and it is sorted the lowest sales or
let's say the first value is 25. So with
that we have solved the first part of
the task finding the lowest sales for
each product. Let's go to the next one.
We have to find out the highest sales
for each product. So let's go and use
the last value for this. So let's have a
new line. We're going to have a last
value again the
sales. Then we're going to go and define
the window. So it's going to be the
exact same window. We have to partition
the data by the product ID and order the
data by sales. So let's go and just copy
the previous one and let's call it for
now highest sales. So let's go and
execute it. So now if you check the
results, you will see our issue over
here again. Right? We are not getting
the highest sales for this window. The
highest sales is 90. But as you can see,
we are getting the exact same sales. And
we have explained that in the previous
example. So in order to fix this, we're
going to go and add for it the frame. So
rows between current row and the
unbounded following.
So now let's go and execute this. So now
let's check the result. As you can see
over here, we got the highest sales
correctly. So for this window, the
highest ones is 90. and as well for this
window the 60 and so on. So with that
you have solved both of the tasks the
lowest and the highest sales. But now I
would like to show you my honest opinion
about this tasks. I will not go and use
the last value to find the highest
sales. So let me show you how I usually
do it. I'm going to go and use the first
value in order to find the last value.
So now let me show you what I mean.
Let's go and add a new row. I will just
take the whole thing from the lowest
sales. But what I'm going to do, I'm
just going to go and change the order.
So that means we will not go and sort
the data like this ascending from the
lowest sales to the highest sales. We're
going to go and switch it. So we're
going to go and sort the data from the
highest sales to the lowest sales. And
with that, the first value going to be
the highest sales. So let me just rename
it highest sales. Let's give it like
two. So let's go and execute this. And
now you can see over here we got the
exact same results because we sorted the
data differently and we get the first
value. So this is going to give you the
exact same effect like the last value.
And as you can see I don't have to
define now any window or something like
that. I can stick with the default frame
but just twisting the order by. So this
is how you can do it as well using only
the first value. So now just for the
sake of this task there's as well
another possibility in how to solve
this. You can go and use the minmax
functions. So let me just take the same
and have a new one the lowest sales. We
can go and say you know what let's get
the min. So we are saying find me the
minimum sales and we don't have to go
and sort anything. So we can go and just
divide it like this. So let's give it
another ID. Let's go and execute it. So
as you can see we got the exact same
results like the other two highest
sales. So as you can see we can solve
this task using three different
functions. Either go and use the last
value but you have to define the frame
or you can go and use the first value
where you switch or flip the order by or
simply just using the max function in
order to get the highest sales. So guys
as you can see we can use the first
value and the last value in order to
find out the extremes like here in this
example the lowest and the highest
sales. So there is like similarity
between those two functions and as well
the min and max. And of course what
we're going to do with this value over
here we can go and compare it with the
current sales. So for example we can go
and extend our task where we say find
the difference in sales between the
current and the lowest sales. So in
order to do that let me just clean up
all those stuff and let's stick with the
first value and the highest value like
this. So we have to compare now the
current sales which is this field over
here. the sales the original one with
the lowest sales with the whole thing
from here. So let's go and do that. So
we're going to have a new line and we're
going to say just simply subtract the
sales from the lowest sales like this.
And let's give it a name sales
difference. So that's it. Let's go and
execute it. Now as you can see the
result in one row I'm comparing the
current sales which is 90 with the
lowest sales from this product. It's
going to be the 10. So with that we're
going to get the distance let's say
between those two informations and it
going to be 80. So now for the next one
the distance between this value and the
lowest value is shorter. So we are near
the lowest value. So as you can see over
here we can now compare the sales
between the current sales and one
extreme in order to find the distances
between two values. So this is again
very important analysis in order to do
comparison analyszis.
All right friends, so now let's do a
quick recap about the value functions or
we call them sometimes analytical
functions. So what they do, they're
going to go and allow you to access a
specific value from another row. This
going to help you in order to do complex
calculations with very simple SQL
without having you joining tables
together or doing self joins. And for
the value functions we have four types
or let's say for functions the first one
allows you to access the previous value
like the previous month using the lag
function. The next one it allows you to
access the next values the next month
using the lead function. Then we have
another one it allows you to access the
first value in a subset using the first
value function. And another option we
can go and access the last value in a
subset using the last value function.
Moving on to the next one, we have the
rules of the syntax. So about the first
point, it is the expressions. We can go
and use any data type. It could be a
number, string, a date, anything. Now in
order to perform those functions, we
have to go and sort the data by the
order by. So order by is required. It is
a must. Then for the frame, you are
allowed to use it. So it is an optional
thing. I would say always leave it empty
for the frame. But only for the last
value, you have to go and customize
otherwise it will not work. Now to the
next point, we have the use cases. We
have simply very important use cases for
the value functions in data analytics.
So what we can do? We can do time series
analyszis. As we learned, we can do
month overmonth analyzes and
yearover-year analyzes. Those analyszis
are classical and it's always the first
question in that analyszis in order to
measure are we growing with the business
or are we declining? How the performance
between the current year and the
previous year. So as you can see we are
doing always comparison using those
window functions. The next use case is
as well about the time we can do time
gap analyzes as we analyzed the customer
behavior the customer retention where we
have calculated the average days between
two orders and the last use case it's as
well about comparison comparison
analyzes we can go and use the value
functions in order to compare the
current value with extreme like
comparing the current sales with the
highest sales or to the lowest sales. So
my friends those analyzers are essential
in data analyzers you will be countering
them in each company in each business
you have to answer those questions and
you can do that very easily using the
SQL window functions all right my
friends so that's all about the window
value functions and with that we have
covered everything about how to
aggregate your data using SQL and those
are very important tools on how to do
data analytics in SQL especially if you
are a data scientist and data analyst.
So with that we are done with this
chapter and I can tell you with that we
have covered the intermediate level. So
we have learned how to filter the data,
how to combine the data and as well the
most important functions in SQL. Now
we're going to go to the third and last
level we will cover now the advanced
level. So the first level going to be
about the advanced SQL techniques. So
now if you go inside it and in SQL there
are like different techniques in order
to organize our complex projects. So
first I'm going to explain for you what
is exactly I'm talking about what is
complex queries and why we have it and
then we're going to start with the first
topic the subqueries. So let's
go. Normally in projects we have a
database and we have a person that is
responsible for the database the
database administrator that take cares
of the database structure. And now in
very simple scenario we're going to have
a user that is writing queries in order
to retrieve data from the database. So
he or she going to write an SQL query
and then this query going to be sent to
the database where it's going to execute
it and then the database going to return
the results. So at the end our user
going to see the result of the query
that he wrote. So this is a very
simplified scenario on how we use a
database. But my friends in the real
world things are totally different.
Things in real projects get very
complicated like this. So for example,
you have a financial analyst that is
writing a huge block of SQL query that
is very complex and there will be like
another user that have different role
like a risk manager that is as well
writing a very complex query and from
different departments from different
projects for different tasks. You will
have a lot of analysts that are writing
many complex queries. So all those
analysts and managers have a direct
access to your database and they are
executing a complex analytical queries
in order to generate maybe a report or
something. Now not only those guys are
doing analyszis on your database you
will have as well our friend the data
engineer that is saying you know what
I'm building a data warehouse and I
would like to extract your data. So that
data engineer going to go and write an
extract query in order to extract the
data from the database. And then he has
a different script for the
transformations in order to manipulate,
filter, clean up, aggregate your data.
And then a third script in order to
collect the result of the
transformations and load it in another
database called data warehouse. A data
warehouse is like special database that
collect data from different sources and
integrate it in one place. in order to
do analytics and reporting. And now at
the end of this chain, you will have a
data analyst and she writes as well
queries in order to analyze the data in
the data warehouse. Or you might have a
different query in order to prepare the
data before inserting it to a tool like
PowerBI in order to generate
visualizations and reports. So we call
this a data warehouse system or a
business intelligence system that
extract and extract from your data and
manipulate it and transform it for
analyzes. Now not only we have a data
engineer and data analyst accessing your
database and doing queries, we have as
well our friend the data scientist. So
now our data scientist as well has a
direct access to your database. So he
might write like different queries in
order to extract the data and as well to
manipulate the data that are needed in
order to develop a model and doing
machine learning and AI. And now one
more scenario that I see in many
projects where the result of the data
analyst going to be used in another
query in order to prepare the results
for data visualizations PowerBI or in
order to export like a Excel list. So as
you can see we have a lot of people with
different roles that want to access your
database and do analyzes on top of it
and that's because everyone want to
answer questions based on the data and
now if I look to this I still think this
is a simplified version and how things
works in the data projects and I can
tell you in real projects things are way
more complicated than this so now if you
sit back and look to this we will find
many challenges and problems for example
all those people are not talking to each
others And each one of them are creating
like their own query. But if you go and
take all those queries and compare them
side by side, you will find in the
scripts and queries logic that is keep
repeating. So the queries from the
analyst or the data scientists and data
engineers, they might contain a
redundant logic. And of course the issue
of this we have the same effort
repeating over and over and maybe not
everyone is getting the logic
implemented correctly because not all of
them having the right skills in SQL. So
this is a big issue in this setup. And
now we have another challenge having
this scenario. If you don't optimize it
you will have a performance issue
everywhere. So the data warehouse or the
data engineer scripts might take like 5
hours and the query from the analyst
might take like 40 minutes and before
inserting the data to reports we might
have 30 minutes and 1 hour there 30
minutes there and everyone else is as
well suffering from bad performance on
their queries and the performance
everywhere is really bad. So if everyone
is writing big complex queries don't
expect that they will have a good
performance. Now to the third challenge
that I observed in many projects and
that is the complexity. Now behind the
original database you might have a data
model that is prepared and optimized
only for one application. So you will
have in the data model a lot of tables
and all those tables have different
relationship between them and of course
only the developers and the experts of
this database understand the physical
data model behind this database. And now
if you give access to all those analysts
they will have a lot of questions
because first they have to understand
the data model before writing any query.
So that means a lot of data workers are
keep asking our expert from this
database questions. So for example how
to connect the table A with the table B
and where do I find my columns? What
this table means? I'm getting bad result
in my query because your data is really
corrupt. So the developers of the
database will get a lot of questions
from the analyst and they have to
explain over and over their data model
so that the users are able to write
those complex queries. So that means all
those users are stressing the database
team by many questions and as well the
users are writing very complex queries.
So the complexity is a really big
challenge. Now as well by looking to
this picture you will find a lot of
errors from those queries to the
database and this might cause a lot of
database stress. So keep executing
repeatedly a big complex queries going
to makes really big stress for the
database and it going to bring the
database down. And the last challenge of
this picture is that the data security.
So if you leave it like this by giving
the users a direct access to your
database tables you might have a problem
because it might be okay for like some
data engineers and so on but you don't
want to give for each data analyst a
full access to the database tables. So
you have to protect your tables the
columns the rows everything. So you
cannot leave it like this where everyone
having a direct access to the physical
database tables. Now enough talking
about challenges problems and issues.
Let's be solutionoriented. So what are
the solutions of those issues? Of
course, there are many solutions, but
we're going to focus now on five
techniques. We can go and use sub
queries or CTE, common table
expressions. We can introduce views to
our database or temporary tables or we
can go and use the technique of the CTAs
carrier table as select. So this is
exactly why we have to understand those
five techniques in order to solve all
those issues that we might face in our
data
projects. All right friends, so now
after we understood the importance of
those five techniques, let's take a
quick and simplified look to the
database architecture because I want you
to understand what happens behind the
scenes and how the database execute the
queries from these five techniques. So
by understanding this architecture you
will understand how things works. So
let's go. For each story there are two
sides. We have the server side and the
client side. In the client side it's
like for example you you are writing an
SQL query for a specific purpose. Now in
the server side we have many things. So
the server is where the database lives
and it has many components like the
database engine. The database engine is
the brain of the database that handles
different operations like storing,
retrieving and managing data in the
database. So each time you execute a
query, the database engine going to take
care of it. And now in the database we
have very important component that is
the storage and the two main types of
storage in a database are disk storage
and cache. The disk storage is like a
long-term memory where the data is
stored permanently. So it's like the
disk at your PC. It stores the data
permanently even if you turn off the
system. And one important feature of the
disk is that it can stores a lot of
data. But the disadvantage of the disk
storage is that it is slow. So it is
slow to write and to read. Now in the
other hand we have the cache is a
short-term memory where the data is
stored temporary. It's like the RAMs at
your PC. It holds the most frequently
used data. So the database can access it
quickly in order to retrieve data. And
the big advantage of the cache is that
it is fast. So it is very fast for the
database to retrieve data from the cache
compared to the disk. But the
disadvantage of the cache, the data is
stored there only for short period. So
it's like tradeoff between the speed and
how much data you can store and how
long. Now let's talk about the disk
storage. This is very important in
databases. There are typically three
types of storage areas. There we have
the user data, the system catalog and
the temporary data and each storage type
has a different purpose. So what is user
data storage? It is the main content of
the database. So it stores the actual
data all the informations that are
relevant for the users. So it's stored
there all the important data that the
users cares about. So this is the
storage where the users are interacting
all the time. So where do we find the
user data? If you go to our database
sales DB and then you go to the tables
now we find all these tables that we are
already used the customers employees
orders and so on those tables are the
user data. So now if I go and say select
from sales orders and all those
informations that we are seeing now are
the users data. So this is what we users
actually care about. All other stuff
that we see inside databases as a user
we don't care about it. We care only
about our data. But in the database, we
don't have only the user data. We have
many other informations. So this is what
we mean with the user data
storage. Now what is system catalog?
This is the internal storage for the
database for its own information. So
it's like a blueprint that keeps
tracking everything about the database
itself. So that means the main purpose
of the system catalog is that it holds
the metadata informations about the
database. So what is a metadata?
Metadata is data about data. Now let's
understand what this means. What we have
done so far is that we have created a
table called customers and we have
defined inside it like multiple columns
like the customer ID, first name, last
name and then we have inserted our data
inside this table. So we have inserted
five customers. So those informations
are my data. I have created those
informations and stored it inside the
database. That's why we call it the user
data. So nothing so far is new. So now
what happens behind the scenes is that
the database server will not only store
the user data that you have provided but
also it's going to go and store a
different type of data inside the
database and this data is the metadata.
So the database server going to store
the metadata of the customer's table and
it going to look like this. There is
like a table name, there is a column
names and those are the column names
that you have defined inside your
database and those are the column names
that you have defined as you are
creating the table customers and it's
going to store as well additional
informations like which data type like
the customer ID is int and the last name
is v charts and many other informations
like the length of the column and
whether the column is nullable or not.
So as you can see in the metadata we are
having a description a data about the
structure of the customers and in the
metadata we can find a lot of
informations about not only the tables
and columns but as well about the
schemas and the database. So you can
find a full catalog about the structure
of your database. Basic table the
customers table it contains data about
the actual data. So it stores data about
the customers. But the metadata of the
customers table contains data about
data. So in the databases each table
that you are using in order to store
your data has a table twin that
describes the structure of your data. So
this is what we mean with a system
catalog or a metadata. And now you might
ask where I can find all those system
catalog and metadata inside our client
here. Well, you cannot navigate through
those informations in the object
explorer like we used to do for the user
data. But you can find those
informations in a special hidden schema
called the information schema. The
information schema in SQL server is a
systemdefined schema that contains a set
of built-in views that help us to find
information about our database like
tables, columns, and other objects. So
let's go and explore it. We're going to
go and say select star from
information schema. And then let's have
a dot. And now we get from SQL a list of
all views that are available in order to
browse the metadata of our database. So
for example, you can see here tables.
You can see informations about the views
and as well about the columns. So let's
go and select the columns and let's go
and execute it. And now in the output we
can find informations about the schema
about the table names like for example
here the customers. Let me just go and
select this table. And then we find all
the columns inside this table how they
are sorted. So we have here the order of
each column and as well the data type
and the size of each column and many
other stuff. So as you can see we got
here all the informations all the
metadata of each table and as well for
each column inside the table. So with
that you can check which tables does
exist in your database. For example I
find here like something called test
two. So maybe I was trying to test
something. I can go now and clean up
stuff right and this is exactly why the
database maintain such a catalog. It
helps the database to quickly find the
structure of each table and of each
column. and it helps me as well as a
user to browse the catalog of the
database. So for example I can go over
here and say okay let's get a distinct
table name. So with that I will get a
list of everything that I have inside
the database. So we have the customers
employees and some tests that I have
done. So metadata are
awesome. Now we come to the third
storage that temporary data storage. It
is a temporary space used by the
database for short-term task like
processing a query or sorting data. And
once these tasks are done, what going to
happen? The database going to go and
clean up the storage. And now of course
the question is where we can find these
temporary tables that is using the
temporary storage in the disk. Well
actually if you go to the object
explorer you will not find it inside our
database sales DB but you will find it
inside the system databases. Now since
we are working locally we have the full
access to everything inside the SQL
server. But in real projects if you are
just a user or let's say developer you
will not have access to the system
databases only for the database
administrators. But now we are working
on the local copy. So let's go to the
system database and here you have a
special database from the SQL server
called temp DB. And if you go inside it
we will find here tables and temporary
tables. So this is exactly where you can
find all the temporal tables that you
are generating. Now currently we didn't
create any temporary tables that's why
it's empty. But once you start creating
temporary tables you will find those
tables underneath this folder. We will
learn about the temporary tables in the
next
sections. So these are the main
component of the database architecture.
So now let's have an example. Now we
have a table called orders that is
stored inside the user storage and the
metadata of this table is stored in the
catalog. So now let's say that you are
at the client side and you write a
simple select query in order to select
the data of the orders. So now that
query is sent to the server in order to
be executed and the database engine
going to take the query in order to
process it. So first the database engine
going to check whether we have the data
in the cache because if the data is
stored in the cache then things going to
be really fast and the database engine
can solve the task quickly but in this
scenario we don't have the orders
informations in the cache that's why the
database engine going to say okay it's
not in the cache let's check the disk so
it will find the orders information in
the disk and the query going to be
executed then the result of this query
going to be sent back to the client side
where at the end in return you will see
in the output the result of the table
orders. So this is how the SQL database
execute very simple select
query query is a query inside another
query. So what this means let's have a
sketch to understand it. So so far what
we have learned we have different
database tables like the orders
customers and so on and we write a
simple SQL queries like select from
where. So the SQL going to retrieve data
from the database tables and in the
output we will get some kind of results.
So this is so far what you have done. We
have done very simple queries. Now in
our query we can have things little bit
different. So we could have another
query that is inside our query where we
do the same things like select from
where. So we have now a query inside our
query and we call this embedded query we
call it a sub query and the original
query the first one where we have select
from we call it main query. So now if
you execute the whole query what going
to happen SQL first going to go and
select the subquery and then it's going
to execute it. So it's going to go and
select and retrieve data from our
database tables and the result of the
subquery will not be sent to the users
to us. So we cannot see it. What can
happen? the result can stay inside the
query as an intermediate results and
then now our main query can go and start
interacting with this intermediate
result from the subquery. So the main
query going to do some kind of
operations on top of this intermediate
results and use it for filtering or
joining or any purpose and still the
main query can go and query the original
database tables. So now the main query
has two sources for data. The original
database tables and as well the result
from another query. So now by looking to
this you can see the subquery is a query
inside the main query and it play a role
of supporter. So it supports the main
query with data and the main job of the
main query is of course to get all those
data and to show us at the end the final
results. Now there is now two things
about this intermediate results that we
got as a result from the subquery. Once
the execution of the query is completely
done, what can happen is going to go and
destroy this intermediate result. So
it's going to totally drop it. So we
will not find it anywhere. It's
completely lost. Now the other thing
about the intermediate results is that
imagine you are making another query
that is completely outside of the first
query. We are selecting few tables from
our database. Now you might say you know
what is it possible to access the
intermediate results from the first
query. So now we are talking about
completely external query you cannot do
that. The intermediate result of the
subquery is only locally known from the
main query itself and it is not globally
available for any other query. So the
subquery can be used only from the main
query.
So with that we have understood what are
subqueries and now you might ask me why
do we need them in the first place? Why
sub queries are important? Let's have
the following sketch. Now in our complex
task we might have to do several stuffs
in our query. Like for example the first
step we have to go and join tables in
order to prepare the data and then the
outcome of the joins should be filtered.
So this going to be our step two. And
then on top of that in the step three we
have to go and do transformations like
maybe handling the nulls or creating new
columns and many other stuff. And the
last step we want to go and do data
aggregations like summarizing the data
or finding average. Now if you go
immediately and start writing the SQL
query without having a plan what can
happen you're going to end up having a
long complex SQL query and it's going to
be really hard to write and as well to
understand and read. And now what we can
do instead of that we're going to go and
divide our task based on those steps. So
we're going to write one query section
for each step. For example, for joining
tables we're going to have one query for
filtering another one transformation
another one and for the aggregation
we're going to have the last query. So
now since each step is like a
preparation for the next step we can go
and say each of those queries is a
subquery. So for step one, step two,
step three, we have sub queries and they
are all doing like calculations and
preparations for the last step to the
aggregations and we call the last step
the main query and of course the whole
thing can exist in one single query. So
if you want to visual this like you have
a subquery in circle and then this
circle belongs to a bigger circle called
the main query. By the way, sometimes we
call the main query as the outer query
and the subquery we can call it an inner
query. And of course, we can have many
subqueries and many small circles inside
each others to form something called
nested queries. So this is the main
purpose of using subqueries in our
scripts and queries. It's going to help
us to reduce the complexity and going to
make it easier to read and we can have
like a flow logical flow inside our
queries.
Now for the sub queries there are many
different types and categories. So now
what we're going to do I'm going to show
you an overview of all those types and
categories and then later we're going to
deep dive into each of those types. So
first of all if you are thinking about
the dependencies between the subquery
and the main query. There is mainly two
types of subqueries. We have the
non-correlated subquery. That means the
subquery is independent from the main
query. And the second type is the
correlated subquery. It's exactly the
opposite. The subquery gonna depend on
the main query. Of course, we can
explain all those stuff in details.
Don't worry about it. So, this is the
first group. Now, there is another group
on how to group up the subqueries
depending on the result type. So, I mean
with this that the subquery has
different output and results. For
example, we have scalar subquery. It
returns only one single value. or
another type it's called the row
subquery. It's going to return multiple
rows and the final type called the table
subquery. It is a subquery that returns
multiple rows and as well multiple
columns. Now we come to the third way
and the last way on how to categorize
the subqueries and this time based on
the location and the clauses. So we are
describing here where the subquery going
to be used within the main query. So we
can use it in different locations and
clauses like the select clause or we can
use it in the from clause and this is
the most common type for the subqueries
or we can use it before joining tables
and we can use it in order to filter the
data in the work clause and in the work
clause as we learned there are two
different sets of operators. We can use
the subgrade together with the
comparison operators the less, greater,
equal and so on. Or we can use it with
the logical operators like the in, any,
all and exists. So now those are the
different types and categories for the
subqueries and we're going to now deep
dive into all of them. So now let's go
and start with the easiest category, the
result types of the subqueries.
Now we have different types of
subqueries based on the results. So this
means the amount of data that the
subquery going to return. So the first
type is the scalar subquery. So it is a
subquery that it's going to return only
one single value like for example the
value three. Let's have an example for
the scalar subquery. So in this query
for example if you are saying select
star you will get all columns all the
rows from one table. But for the scalar
subquery we need only one value. So how
we usually get it is by doing some
aggregations. For example, if you go and
say let's get the average of sales. So
let's execute it. And with that in the
output we have only one value with a 38.
We call such a query as a scalar query.
So it has only one row and only one
column. So this is a scalar query. All
right. So now to the second type we have
the row subquery. So it is a subquery
that going to return multiple rows and a
single column. So we're going to have
like values 1 2 3. So it is only one
column with multiple rows. Let's have an
example for the row query. As you can
see now we are saying select star from
the table orders and now we are getting
multiple rows and multiple columns. But
for the row queries we need only one
column. So you can go over here for
example say customer ID. And if you go
and execute it. So now if you check the
output we have a single column and as
well multiple rows. So we have like a
list of values and this is what we call
row query. All right. So now to the last
type we have the table sub query. It's
going to go and return multiple rows and
as well multiple columns like any
regular tables. So this subquery going
to return a lot of values. Okay. So
let's see an example of that table
query. So if you check our example here,
select star from orders, we got here
multiple rows and as well multiple
columns and of course we can go and
select multiple columns like for example
the order ID and the order dates. So if
we execute it here in the output we have
multiple columns we have two columns and
as well multiple rows that's why this
kind of query is as well a table query.
All right. So with that we have learned
the different types of subqueries based
on the result type. Now we're going to
go and learn how to use the subqueries
in different locations in our query. So
we're going to start with how to use
subquery in the from
[Music]
clause. Okay. So we typically use the
subqueries in the from clause in order
to create temporary result sets that act
as a table for the main query. So it's
like in some scenarios we cannot use the
tables directly from the database. We
have to prepare it somehow before we do
our actual query. Okay. So let's check
the syntax of the sub query inside the
from clause. So we start with the usual
stuff where we go and say select and few
columns that we want to retrieve and
then we say okay from usually after the
from comes the table name from our
database that we want to query. But this
time instead of writing the table name,
we're going to have another SQL query.
So that means we don't define the table
name, we define another select
statements where we have as well again
select a column from specific table and
then maybe we have a filter. And in
order now to tell SQL this is a
subquery, we have to use the
parenthesis. So we're going to have the
parenthesis at the start and at the end.
This is a subquery. This is not the main
query. And after the parenthesis, we can
go and define the alias for the results
that we're going to get from this
subquery. In many databases, this alias
is an optional, but for the SQL server,
we have to go and specify an alias. So,
it is a must in SQL server. So, again,
we call this a subquery and the outer
query we call it a main query. So, this
is the syntax of the subquery in the
from clause. Okay. Okay, so now we have
the following task and it says find the
products that have a price higher than
the average price of all products. So
we're going to do it step by step and
here we have two steps. The first one is
that we have to go and calculate the
average price of all products and the
second step we're going to use this
value in order to filter the table
products in order to find the prices
that is higher than this average price.
So let's start with the first step where
we're going to find the average price.
I'm going to select the following
informations. So product ID,
price from the table sales products. So
let's go and execute it. So now we have
the product and as well the prices and
we need this price here in order to
compare it with the average price. So
that means we need this price and as
well side by side we need the average
price. So that means we need
aggregations and details and that's why
we're going to go with the window
function average. So let's go and do
this. This is very simple. So it's going
to be the average
price and we don't want to partition the
data. So it's going to be an over empty
and this going to be the average price
like this. So let's go and execute it.
And with that we have calculated the
average price. So now we have all the
informations in the first step. We have
the average price, we have the price and
as well the products. So now the next
step is that we have to go and filter
the data to find out all the products
where the price is higher than the
average. That means we will do this step
based on those information that we have
now. So that means we have to go and use
the logic of subquery and main query.
Since this is the first step to prepare
the data, we're going to use this as a
subquery. So we're going to call this a
sub query like this. And we have to go
and use it in the main query. So how we
going to do that? We have to go and
write the main query. So it's going to
be I'm going to start over here. Select
and then I will take all the columns
from. So this is the main query. Let me
just make this a little bit smaller. And
what we're going to do now so now the
main query going to get the data from
the sub query. So the whole thing going
to be used inside the from close. So now
in order to put the subquery inside the
main query we have to go and use the
parenthesis. So we're going to have it
at the start and as well at the end and
what we usually do we go and add like a
tab in order to understand okay this is
the subquery and then this is the main
query. So now one more thing that we
have to add for the whole subquery in
the SQL server that we have to give it
an alias. So you can go and give it any
name that you would like. I usually go
with only one character with the T. It
stands for table. So you can use
anything that you want. But we have in
SQL Server to give an alias for the
subquery. So now what we are saying, we
are saying select everything from the
subquery. If you go over here and
execute it, you will get the exact same
results because the main query is doing
nothing. It's saying just select
everything from the subquery. But now in
order to solve the task, we are not
interested with all products. We are
interested only the products where the
price is higher than the average. That's
why we have to go and use the where
clause. So we're going to say where the
price is higher than the average price.
So this filtering is done in the main
query. It's not inside the subquery. So
now that means in the main query we are
doing something. Let's go and execute
it. And with that we saw the task. We
are getting now two products where the
price is higher than the average price.
So as you can see it's very simple. If
the task has multiple steps then we can
do that using multiple sub queries until
we have the main query and we can learn
from this that the subquery is here is
only to support the main query. So we
are preparing here that all the data
that we need in order to have the final
result for the main query. So for this
task we cannot go immediately
calculating the results we have first.
So for this kind of task we cannot
immediately like put everything in one
select query. We have first to prepare
the data in one subquery and then pass
the values for the main query. And this
is what we mean with the table subquery.
And here one quick tip for you. If you
would like to see the intermediate
results that we are getting from the
subquery, you can go and highlight the
subquery itself without the parenthesis.
So we are just highlighting the
subquery. You can go now and execute it.
And with that SQL will not go and
execute everything. SQL going to execute
only what you are highlighting. So this
is really nice way in order to see the
results of the subquery as you are like
debugging or searching for errors. You
can go and see the intermediate results
that is used from the main query. And of
course if you deselect and not highlight
anything and execute SQL going to go and
execute everything the whole query. So
this is how we use the table sub query
inside the from close. All right. Right.
So let's have another task and it says
rank the customers based on their total
amount of sales. So again if you check
here we have like two steps. First we
have to find the total amount of sales
and then after that we have to go and
rank the customers. So again we have
like two steps and we can use the
subqueries in order to solve it. So
let's start with the first step where
we're going to find the total amount of
sales. So let's go and select the
customer ID and as well the
sales from the table sales
orders. Let's go and execute it. So now
in the output we have like multiple
customers and their sales. We have to go
and now find the total amount of sales
for each customer. That means we have to
go and use the group by. So we're going
to go and summarize the
sales. So total sales and then group up
the data by the customer ID. So like
this. Let's go and execute it. Now as
you can see in the output we have four
customers and we have the total sales
for each customer. And with that we have
solved the first step. We have the total
amount of sales for each customer and we
have now prepared the data for the next
query in order to rank the customers. So
now I think you already getting how
important are the subqueries in order to
do stepby-step analyszis. So this is our
subquery. Now we need the main query. So
I will start preparing it. So main query
like this. And let's go first and select
everything. So select star from let me
just make this a little bit bigger like
this. And now we have to go and convert
this query to a subquery. So we need the
parenthesis. So the starting and the
ending and for the SQL server I'm going
to give it an alias and I would like to
push everything to the right side. So
let's go and execute it. Perfect. So it
is working with that the subquery is
passing the data in the from clause to
the main query. Now of course the main
query is now is useless. It's just like
selecting the data. We have to go and
calculate the rank and for that we have
a very nice window function. So we're
going to go and use the rank. So it
doesn't need any parameters over we have
to sort the data order by. So we have to
go and sort the data by the total sales
descending from the highest to the
lowest. So we're going to go with the
total sales and descending. So now as
you can see we are using the total sales
that we have already prepared in the
subquery. So without preparing first the
data we will not be able to rank the
customers in the main query. So that's
it. Let's go and execute it. And with
that SQL sorted our data and we have a
nice ranking based on the data that we
had from the subquery. So this is the
highest customer with the sales and then
the customer number one and so on. So
again in this task we have like multiple
steps and we use the power of the
subqueries in order to do it step by
step. So that's all on how to use the
subquery inside the from close. Okay. So
now let's see quickly how SQL executed
our query. So we have here our query and
we are quering the table orders. So the
first step is that SQL going to go and
identify the subquery and then it going
to go and execute it. So SQL going to go
and execute the subquery part where we
are aggregating the data based on the
customer ID. So once the subquery is
executed the next step is that the
result going to be introduced as an
intermediate results. So these results
we will not see it in the output. It's
going to be like temporarily saved in
the memory. So now the next step is that
SQL going to go to the main query and
it's going to execute it based on the
intermediate results. So that means the
main query will not go back to the
original table. It's going to go and
query the intermediate results. So here
what SQL going to do going to go and
rank the intermediate results by
introducing a new column where we see
the ranks 1 2 3 4 and the output of the
main query going to be the final
results. So as you can see it's very
simple. First SQL is executing the
subquery and the result of the subquery
going to be used in the main query and
once the main query is executed we will
get the final results. So the subquery
here is only supporting the main query.
So those are the steps that SQL uses in
order to execute the
subqueries. So now let's understand how
the database server execute the
subqueries behind the scenes. Let's go.
So now let's say that you are data
analyst and you are writing a query at
the client side where you have a
subquery inside the main query. So once
you go and execute it what's going to
happen the database engine going to go
and identify the subquery and in this
situation the database going to execute
first the subquery. So here subquery is
like selecting and retrieving data from
the table orders. So that means the
database has to retrieve the data from
the disk storage from the user data. So
now once the subquery is executed the
result the intermediate results going to
be stored in the cache. So this means
the result of the subquery is temporary
and as well very fast to retrieve. And
now once the database engine is done
with the subquery it going to go and
start executing the main query. So let's
see in this scenario it's completely
depending on the result of the subquery.
So that means the main query going to go
and interact with the cache storage. So
this means now the data going to be
retrieved very fast from the result of
the subquery. Once it's done, it's going
to forward the result to the database
engine and the database engine going to
forward the results to the client side.
And at your side, you will find the
final result. And of course, once
everything is executed, the database
engine going to go and clean up the
cache. So the subquery results going to
be destroyed and removed completely from
the cache in order to have a free space
for other queries. So this is how the
database server execute the subqueries
behind the
scenes. All right. So now we're going to
talk about how to use the subquery in
the select clause. So now we typically
use the subqueries in the select clause
to aggregate the data side by side with
the columns of the main query. Okay. So
let's check the syntax of the subquery
in the select clause. So we start with
the simple stuff where we say okay let's
go and select a column that we want to
retrieve from specific table. So nothing
new we are just quering a table. And now
what we can do in this query is that not
only we can go and select the columns
from specific table we can go and insert
here inside the select another query
like a full query like select from and
where. So again it's like query inside
another query and we call this of course
a subquery. In order to tell SQL this is
a subquery we go and add the
parenthesis. So with SQL going to
understand huh this is a subquery and
the result of this query going to be
used in the select. So we can handle it
like any other column. We can go and
give it like an alias. It is here
optional and not m to add an alias. So
this inner query we call it a subquery
and the outer query going to be the main
query. So this is how you put a subquery
in the select clause. But there is one
rule for this query that the result of
this subquery must be a scalar query.
That means the result must be a single
value because otherwise it will not
work. SQL here is expecting only one
value. So this is how we use the
subquery inside the select clause. All
right, let's have the following task and
it says show the product ids, product
names, prices and the total number of
orders. So now if we check the task
there is like two parts. The first part
is that we are showing the details about
the products and the second part that we
have to go and calculate the total
number of orders. So let's see what
we're going to do. First let's go and
solve this simple part here where we
have the product ID, product names and
prices. So we're going to go and select
the product ID and the product and then
the price from the table sales products.
Let's go and execute it. So with that we
have solved the first part of the task.
We have the details about the products.
Now we go and solve the second part. We
have to go and calculate the total
number of orders. Now this information
come from different table from the
products. We cannot calculate it from
products. We have to go and query the
orders. So now what am I going to do?
I'm going to go and calculate this part
in separate query. Instead of having it
here inside the products. So let's have
a semicolon in order to have a second
query. So we're going to go and select
the total number of orders. That means
we can go simply do account star from
the table sales orders. Let me just make
it a little bit bigger. So we're going
to call it total orders and a semicolon
as well. So now if you just execute the
whole thing, you will get here like two
parts in the results. First you have the
details of the products and the second
part we have now the total number of
orders. We have 10 orders. But now with
that we have like two different queries
like separated from each others and we
have two different results. But in the
task we have to show all those
informations in one result. So now what
we can do we can put one query inside
another query. So now if you check the
second query the total orders you can
see we have only single value. So we
have a scalar query scalar subquery.
That's why we can go with this as a
[Music]
subquery like this. And I'm going to go
and put everything in one line in order
to see it. So let's remove the
semicolons. We don't need it. And now
what we're going to do, we're going to
go and take the whole thing and put it
inside the main query. So this is the
main query. And now think about it as
new column. So I will put the query
here. So it is just one new column in
our select. But in order to have it as a
subquery, we have to use the parenthesis
at the start and at the end. And of
course, we have to go and give it a
name. So I'm going to go and use the
same name over here. So it's going to be
as total orders. So with that, the setup
for the subquery is ready and it is
inside the select clause in the main
query. Let's go and execute it. Now, as
you can see, we have everything
together. We have the three informations
the product details and as well side by
side with the total orders and since it
is always the same value it going to go
and be repeated for each row. So this is
what we call scalar sub query inside the
select clause and here again very
important to understand if you are using
a subquery inside the select clause only
the scalar subquery is allowed. So for
example instead of having one value from
the aggregation we can go and use the
order ID. So let's see what going to
happen. We will get an error. It going
to says subquery is returning more than
one value and this is not allowed
because we are using the subquery in the
select clause. So that's why we have to
have only one value and by using the
aggregation you will get one value. So
let's repair it. And it's working. And
now again if you would like only to see
the results from the subquery what you
can do you can go and highlight the
subquery like this without the
parenthesis of course and you go and
execute it and with that you can see in
the output the 10 this is the
intermediate results that's going to be
passed to the main query and if you want
the whole thing to be executed just like
unmark it and execute and with that
everything can be executed the subquery
and the main query. So this is the
scalar subquery in the select clause.
Okay, so now let's see quickly how SQL
executed this query step by step. So
this is our original query and we need
two tables from our database for it. So
the first step is that SQL going to go
and identify the subquery and it's going
to go and execute it. So this is the
first step. So the query is targeting
the orders table and we are just simply
doing a count. So in the output we will
get an intermediate results where we are
counting the number of rows of the
orders. Now the next step is that SQ is
going to go and pass this value to the
main query. So this is the second step
and if you go and pass this value to the
main query, it's going to look like
this. So you are saying product ID,
products and the tin. So after SQL
prepared the main query, SQL going to go
and execute it. So this time we are
targeting the products and in the output
we will get all the informations from
the products without any filter because
here we don't have any work clouds and
the final results we will get it like
this. So we will have the product ID,
the product and the total that we got it
from the subquery. So as you can see
here the subquery here is a scalar
subquery where we have only one single
value. So again it's very simple always
SQL starts with the subquery and then
it's going to go and pass the values to
the main query and at the end the main
query going to be executed and we will
get the final result from it. So this is
how SQL executed our query.
All right, next we're going to talk
about how to use the subquery in the
join clause. All right, so now as we are
joining tables in SQL, sometimes we have
to go and prepare the data before doing
the join to dynamically create a result
sets for joining with another table. So
again here we cannot join tables
directly. We have to do a preparation
step before doing the joins. Okay, let's
have the following task and it says show
all customer details and find the total
orders of each customer. Now, of course,
in SQL, you don't have only one
solution, you have multiple solutions.
But I would like to solve this task
using the subquery. So, now if you check
the task, we have like two parts. The
first part we have to show all the
customer details. And the second part,
we have like here an aggregation find
the total orders of each customer. So,
now let's solve those different parts
using two different queries. Let's start
with the easiest one. Show all customer
details. So I think this is very simple.
So select star from sales customers. So
let's go and execute it. So in the
output we have all the details about the
customers and we have solved the first
part. Very simple. Now let's go and
solve the second part. We have defined
the total number of orders of each
customer. That means let me just have a
semicolon over here. We have to go to
the table orders. So let's go and select
first the order ID, customer
ID from the table sales orders like
this. So I will just highlight the
second query and execute it. Now in the
output we have 10 orders and we have the
different customers. Now in order to
find the total orders for each customer
we have to go and use the group pie. In
order to do that it's very simple. We're
going to go over here and say so count
let's go with the star and then we're
going to go and group up the data by the
customer ID. I will go and call this
total orders. So let's go and execute
only these parts and with that we have
four customers and we have the total
number of orders. So with that we have
solved the second part of the task. So
now what I'm going to do, I'm going to
go and execute both of those queries
using the semicolon separately like
this. I will just make this a little bit
bigger. So let's go and execute it. Now
in the output we have the two results,
all details about the customers and the
total number of orders for each
customer. So now what we want to do is
to go and combine those two results in
one. And in order to do that we can use
the joins. So now we have to think about
what is the first query, what is the
second query. Since the first query
returns all the customers that we have
in the database, I would like to have
this as the left table and since in the
second query we have only four
customers, I would like to have it then
as the right table and I will go with
the left join so that I don't miss any
customer because if I do the inner join,
I will lose the customer number five. So
let's go and do that. So this is the
first query in the main query. So I'm
going to call this main query.
And now I'm going to give this as well
an alias like the C. And now we're going
to go and join this table from the
database together with the results the
output of this query. So that means
we're going to do it like this. Left
join and now we're going to join with a
sub query. So we will have our
parenthesis. I will just put here few
spaces so that it's clear it is a
subquery and we need for this an alias.
So let's go and say for example the O.
So with that we are joining a table with
the result of a sub query. And now of
course what is missing is joining the
tables using a key. Now if you check the
two results you can see in both queries
we have the customer ID. That's why
we're going to join with the customer
ID. So on then the customer
ID with the customer ID from the sub
query like this. So we have everything
and let's go and execute it. Now as you
can see in the output we have all the
details about the customer and as well
together with the total number of orders
for each customer together with the
total number of orders for each customer
and as you can see we didn't miss any
customer. So we have all the customers
from the database and we can see that
Anna doesn't have any orders. Now you
might say you know what we have here the
customer ID twice. So what I'm going to
do I will select all the columns from
the customers but from the subquery I'm
interested only on the total orders. So
like this let's go and execute it. Let's
make this a little bit smaller. So now
the results are really clean. We have
all details from the customers and as
well the total orders of each customer.
And of course as we learned if you would
like to check the results from only the
subquery you go and highlight it and
execute it. So as you can see you can
put the subqueries almost everywhere and
this is how we use subqueries inside
joins. Okay. So now we're going to focus
on how to use the subquery in the wear
clause. So now in this scale as we
learned we can go and filter the tables
using the wear clause by using like
static values. But now in real data
projects we're going to go and filter
the data based on like complex logic. So
now in order to prepare this complex
logic we go and use the sub queries in
order to make like dynamic filtering for
our main tables. And now in order to
filter data using the wear clause we
have to go and use operators and we can
split it into like two groups. We have
the comparison operators and another
sets we can call it logical operators or
sometime we call it subqueries
operators. So now first we're going to
talk about the comparison operators. So
there are operators that we can use in
order to compare two values in order to
help us filtering the data based on
specific condition. And now in SQL
basics we have learned that we have
different comparison operators and they
are very simple. So in order to compare
two values we have operator like the
equal we have as well not equal the
opposite. So we have greater than less
than and as well we have greater than or
equal to and the last one we have less
than or equal to. So they are very
simple. Now instead of comparing two
values, we're going to go and compare a
value with the result of subquery using
the comparison operators. All right,
let's check the syntax of the subquery
inside the wear clause using the
comparison operators. So we start with
the standard stuff where we say select
few columns that we want to retrieve and
we want to get the data directly from
specific table in our database and now
we come to the where condition where we
want to filter the table. So we say
where and then we select specific column
from the table one. Now since we are
talking about the comparison operators
we can go with operator for example
equal and usually we go and specify here
like static value like a number or
string but instead of having a static
value what we can do we can get the
value from another select statements
another query like here for saying
select a column from table two and with
a filter. So now whatever comes from
this subquery going to be used in order
to filter the table number one. And of
course we are telling SQL this is a
subquery by defining the parenthesis at
the start and at the ends and the outer
query going to be the main query. So as
you can see we are using the subquery in
order to filter the main query. And here
in SQL if you're using subquery with the
comparison operators we have a rule the
subquery must be a scalar subquery. So
only one single value. So that's all
about how to use the subquery in the
wear clause using the comparison
operators. All right. So now we have
again the same task and it says find the
products that have a price higher than
the average price of all products. We
have solved this task already using the
subquery inside the from clause. But now
we're going to go and solve it again
using the subquery but this time inside
the wear clause. So let's do it step by
step. Let's go and get the informations
that we need. So we need the product ID,
we need the price from the table sales
products. So let's go and execute it. So
now we got the list of all products. But
we have to go and filter those
informations using the column price. So
with that in the result, we got all the
products, but we don't need all the
products. We need only the products
where the price is higher than the
average. That means we have to go and
filter the table based on the values of
the price. So now in order to do that
what we're going to do we're going to
use the wear clause and we have to go
and filter the data based on the price
and since we need higher than we're
going to go and use the compressor
operator higher than now next we need
the value average price. So how we going
to do it? We don't have the average
price like out of the box in the table
products. We have to go and calculate
it. That's why we're going to go and
write another query where we're going to
go and find the average
price from the table sales products like
this. So now let's go and highlight it
and then execute it. And with that we
got now the average price of our
products. And as you can see in the
output we have only one single value. So
this is a scalar query. So now what we
need? We need this value in order to be
used in order to filter the first query.
So that's why the first query is the
main query bigger. The second one is the
subquery that going to support the main
query in order to filter the data. So
now what we're going to do, we're going
to take the subquery and use it in the
wear clause. And now of course we have
to tell SQL this is a subquery. That's
why we have to put it inside two
parenthesis. So with that we have the
sub query inside the wear clause in
order to filter the main query. So let's
go and execute it. And now as you can
see in the output we have now only two
products where the price is higher than
the average price. So with that we have
solved the task but this time using the
subquery in the wear clouds in order to
filter the main query. And of course in
order to see this value in our select
since it is scalar sub query we can as
well go over here and put it in our
select just in order to see the value.
So average price. So let's go and
execute it. And with that we can see as
well in our results the average price.
So this is how we use the subquery in
the workcloud using the comparison
operator. Okay. So let's see quickly how
is going to execute our query step by
step. So as usual first is going to go
and identify the subquery. It's going to
be our select average price and so on.
And now the next step SQL going to go
and execute our sub query. So it is
based on the products and since we are
doing aggregations without group by at
the output we will get only one value.
So the average going to be 20. This
value is start intermediately in the
memory. So we will not see it in the
output. SQL going to go and pass this
value to the main query. So the main
query going to look like this. We are
selecting few columns from the table and
we are filtering the data based on the
price that is higher than the value 20
that we got it from the subquery. So now
once SQL have everything for the main
query SQL going to go and execute it. So
SQL going to go to the products and only
select the products where the price is
higher than 20. So it's only those two
rows and in the output we will get the
final results the two products as well.
So product ID and product price. So
that's it. It's very simple. This is how
SQL executed our query. So as usual
first starting with the subquery passing
the value to the main query and at the
end so the main query going to be
executed with the informations from the
subquery and we will get at the end the
final results. So that's
[Music]
it. All right. So now we're going to
talk about the second group of operators
and we're going to start with the in
operator. So what is in operator? As we
learned before in the comparison
operators, we can go and filter the data
based on only one single value. But now
in some scenarios, we have to go and
filter the data based on multiple
values, not only one. In this case, we
can go and use the n operator. So if you
go and use the n operator, it's going to
go and check whether the value matches
any value from a list. So a list of
multiple values. If it matches any of
them, so we will get a true. Okay. Okay.
So now let's have a quick look to the
syntax of the sub query using the in
operator. So we start with the classic
stuff where we say okay we would like to
retrieve the column one column two from
the table one and we want to filter the
data based on the column from the table
one. Now after specifying the column
we're going to use the in operator and
after that we can go and specify static
values but since we are talking about
the subqueries the values going to come
from another query. So here we have
another select statements from table two
and we filter the data for this query.
And now the result of this subquery
going to be used in order to filter the
data using the in operator. And now the
big difference between the in operator
and the comparison operators that the
subquery is allowed to have multiple
rows. So there is no rule about having
like one single value scalar subquery.
We can have in the result a list of
multiple values. So this is the syntax
of the subquery using the in operator.
All right, let's practice using this
task. It says show the details of orders
made by customers in Germany. So let's
see how we can solve this task. First it
needs the details of orders. So as we
know we have the
table sales orders. So let's go and
execute it. So in the output we have all
orders and with all details. But for the
task we don't need all the orders. We
need only the orders that made by
customers from Germany. So now if you
check the table orders, you don't find
any informations about the countries,
right? So we have to go and get it from
another table. And as we know, we can
find these informations in the table
customers. So let's build another query.
So let's say select star from sales
customers like this. So let's go and
execute only the second query like this.
Now, as you can see in the customers, we
have the country column, and this is
exactly what we need. So, now let's make
a list of all customers from Germany.
So, we don't need all customers. We need
only the one that come from Germany.
That's why we're going to go and use the
work clause and we say country equal to
the value Germany like this. So, let's
go and execute it again and check the
results. Now, in the output, we have our
German customers number one and number
four. So now we're going to go and use
this information in order to filter the
table orders. So let's go back to the
table orders over here. And here we have
the customer ID informations. And as we
can see we need the orders where the
customer is either one or four. Now in
order to filter that we're going to go
to the first query and use the work
clause like this and say the customer
ID. So now since we have like two values
one on four we can go and use the
operator in. So let's go and use the in
and let's go and build the list. So
let's go and have the one and four. So
let's go and execute it. Now we can see
the results. We have the orders but only
from the customers one and four. So with
that we have solved the task. We have
the details of orders made by customers
in Germany. Right? And now of course
this is really bad solution because what
about if we get like in the future new
customer you don't want to go and keep
adding here like values and so on for
each time you have a new customer. We
want to make the values for this list to
be dynamic. So we don't need a static
value we need like dynamic values and we
can use the subqueries in order to
retrieve those informations. Right? And
we have it already in the second query.
So let's go back to the second query
over here. We need only those two values
one and four. That's why we're going to
go to the query and say okay let's
retrieve the customer ID. So let's go
and execute it again. And with that we
have with a one and four exactly like we
have it here in the first query. And of
course in the future if there's like
another customer that come from Germany
this list going to be little bit longer.
So this query going to always retrieve
all the customer ids that have the
country equal to Germany. So now what
we're going to do, we're going to take
this as a sub query. Let's go and get
everything from it and now put it
instead of those static values. So of
course we're going to go now and put few
spaces to the right side in order to
understand this is subquery and of
course here we don't use any aliases. So
now what we are doing the results from
this subquery going to be used in order
to filter our main query. So let me just
call it main
query like this and make this smaller.
So let's go and execute it. And now we
are getting the same results. We are
getting all the orders from only the
customers one and four where they come
from Germany. And this informations come
dynamically from the subquery and we
don't have to worry about new customers
from Germany. It's going to be added
here automatically. And this query going
to always return all the orders from
Germany. So this is the power of the
subquery together with the in operator
if you are having like multiple values
multiple rows. So we have solved the
task. All right. Now one more thing.
Let's say that the task is exactly the
opposite. It says show the details of
orders made by customers who don't come
from Germany. So now here there's like
two ways in order to do it. Either you
go to the subquery and you say you know
what the country should not be equal to
Germany. So if you go and execute it,
you will get all the customers ids that
are not from Germany. And if you execute
the whole thing, you will get all the
orders where the customers are not from
Germany. So either you do that or you
stay with the equal to Germany, but you
go and convert the whole logic by using
the operator not. So now we are saying
the customer ID should not be equal to
one of those values. So it should not be
equal to one or four. And for that we
are using the notin operator. So let's
go and execute it. So now with that we
are getting all the orders where the
customers don't come from Germany by
just using notin operator. So that's all
about the notin and the in operators.
All right. So now let's see step by step
how is execute our query. So we are
targeting two tables the customers and
the orders. So the first step is that
SQL going to go and identify the
subquery and it's going to go and
execute it. So the subquery here is
filtering the data based on the country.
So the query going to be executed and in
the output we will get only two rows. So
it is one column with multiple rows.
This is the row subquery and this is our
intermediate results where it's going to
be passed to the main query. So our main
query going to look like this. We are
selecting few informations from the
orders and we are filtering the table
orders based on the customer ID where we
are saying the customer ID must be one
of those values one or four. So the
subquery here is supporting the main
query with the informations for the
filter. Now once SQL have everything
going to go and execute our main query
and this going to be like the following.
So we will start with the first row and
here the customer ID is equal to two. So
the value two is not equal to 1 or four.
That's why this row will be excluded
from the final results. Now let's move
to the second row. We have here the
value three and the value three is not
equal to one of those values. That's why
this value going to be as well failing.
So we will not have it at the output.
And then it's still going to go to the
next one. Now this time the customer ID
is one and it is equal to one of those
values. It's equal to one. So we have a
match. That's why this row will be
included to the results. And the same
thing for the next row because we have
the customer ID one and so on. Now after
SQL checking all those customer ids
whether they are in the list one or four
we will get the final results where we
have here all the orders where the
customer ID either one or four. So this
is how SQL executed the in operator
using the
subqueries. Okay. So now moving on to
the any operator. So we can go and use
the any operator in order to compare a
value if it matches any value from a
list. So that means we can go and use it
in order to check whether a condition is
true for at least one of the values in a
list. Okay. So now let's check quickly
the syntax of the subquery using the any
and all operators. So as we learned
before we can go and use a subquery
inside the wear clause in order to
filter the main query using like the
comparison operators like here less
than. Now the syntax of the any operator
is that you're going to go and use the
comparison operator and after that
immediately you use the keyword any. And
for the all operator going to be exactly
the same where you're going to go and
put after the comparison operator the
keyword all. So the syntax is very
simple. We just add those keywords. So
let's practice using the following task.
Find female employees whose salaries are
greater than the salaries of any male
employee. So that means we want to go
and compare the salaries between the
male and female and specifically we are
searching for female employees whose
salary is greater than at least one male
employee. So let's solve it step by
step. Let's go and start selecting few
informations like for example the
employee
ID and first
name, gender, salary from the table
sales employees. So let's go and execute
it. So now we have like five employees.
Three of them are male and two are
female. So now since we want to compare
the data between male and female let's
go and create two queries. The first one
is filtering the data based on the
gender. So the first one is for the
female. So and we can go and remove this
information over here. Let me just make
this little bit smaller and zoom out.
And the second query it's going to be
the exact opposite. Let's go and get
employee informations for the male. So
let's go and execute it. Now the first
results are the female employees and the
second one are So now for the first
result is for the female employees and
the second one is for the male
employees. So now what do we need in the
output? We need the female employees.
That means this is going to be our main
query. So we are focusing on the female
employees and we are using the male
employees only as a filter and what we
need we need only the salary
informations that's why we can prepare
it like this. I will just put everything
in one line to make it clear. So this
going to be our sub query. So now we're
going to go and work with the main query
where we're going to add one more filter
where we're going to filter the data
based on the salary. Right? So we're
going to say if the salary is greater
than and now we need the values from the
subquery right so this is our subquery
we're going to put it like this and
don't forget about the parenthesis at
the start and at the ends and I would
like still to have those two uh queries
so let's go ahead execute it and now we
will get an error and that's because our
sub query is returning multiple rows and
this is not acceptable we are using the
comparison operator and SQL expect from
the subquery to have scalar subquery. So
only one single value. But now in order
to solve this issue, we can go and use
the logical operators either all or any.
So now since we are saying it's enough
for the salary of the female employee to
be higher than at least one male
employee, we will go with the operator
any. So let's go after the comparison
operator and have the keyword any. And
let's go and execute it again. And now
as you can see in the output we got only
one female employee where her salary is
higher to one of those male employees.
So let me just go and get the first name
as well from the
second query just to have it like this.
So now if you go and compare the salary
of Mary it is not higher than Michael
but it is higher than Frank and Kevin.
And since we are using the any operator
it's enough for Mary to have salary
higher to one of those values. In this
case, it's higher than both Frank and
Kevin. And the condition is fulfilled.
That's why we are getting the marry. And
the other female, let me just check. Do
we have else? So, we have Carol is
salary is less than all the salaries of
the male employees. So, it must be at
least higher than one of the male
employees. So, with that, we have solved
the task, right? All right. So, now we
have another operator that is similar.
We call it the all operator. We can go
and use it in order to compare a value
if it matches all values in a list. So
that means we can go and use it if we
need to check whether a condition is
true every value in a list. I know that
might sound a little bit complicated but
don't worry about it. We can have
examples. Now let's say that our task
says find female employees whose salary
are greater than the salaries of all
male employees. So that means now the
condition is more restrictive. Mary
should now has a salary higher than
every male employee. So it should be
higher to all those values that we have
from the male employees. And of course
in this scenario it's not because we
have Michael. Mary has less salaries
than Michael. And this is a problem
because Mary should has higher salary
than everyone. So let's go and try it.
If I go and write here all and let's go
and execute it, you will see we will not
find any results that fulfill this
requirement. So we don't have any female
employee who her salary is higher than
all male employees and that's because we
have a very small data sets. So this is
how we use all and any operators in our
subqueries in SQL. All right. So with
that we have covered almost everything
about how to use the subqueries in
different locations and clauses. But we
didn't talk about the exist operator and
that's because I would like you to
understand a very important concept in
the subqueries where we have two
different types of the subqueries based
on the dependencies the non-correlated
and correlated subqueries. And after
that we're going to go back to the exist
operator. All right friends. So now we
come to the part where it is a little
bit complicated about the subqueries.
Now we're going to talk about the
dependencies between the subquery and
the main query. So far all the examples
and the subqueries that we have learned
where a noncorrelated subquery. A
non-correlated subquery means a subquery
that can run independently from the main
query. So that means the subquery is
like standalone query. But in the other
hand we have the exact opposite type of
the subquery. We have the correlated
subquery. A correlated subquery is a
subquery that relies on values from the
main query for each row it processes. So
that means the subquery here is
completely depending on the main query.
So I know this might be a little bit
confusing. That's why we can have the
following very simple sketch in order to
exactly understand how this works. So as
usual we have a database tables and now
this time going to go and start
executing the main query first. This is
the first thing happens. So the main
query going to go and query the database
in order to get results and SQL going to
process the results row by row. So now
what going to happen? The main query
going to go and pass the first row
informations to the sub query. So now
the subquery going to get the data from
the main query. So SQL going to execute
the subquery. So here the subquery going
to return a value like for example one.
So here it's very important to
understand that now the SQL or the main
query going to check is there a result
from the sub query in this example yes
we have a results. So here SQL is
checking the output for the subquery for
the first row. So if there is a result
SQL going to go and return the row in
the final result. So this is the whole
iteration happened only for the first
row. So we're going to process the whole
thing again from the start for the
second row. So the main query going to
get the second row from the database and
it going to pass it to the subquery.
Once the subquery gets this new
informations, SQL going to go and
execute the subquery once again. So now
let's say that after executing the
subquery, there were no results. So the
subquery is not returning anything after
the execution. So now what can happen?
SQL and the main query going to check
okay there is no result from the sub
query and this means this row should be
excluded and not presented in the
output. So we will not see this row at
the output. So as you can see SQL is
executing the subquery once again for
the second row. So this will keep
happening as long as we have row. For
example, we have another row. The main
query going to pass it to the subquery.
The subquery going to be executed for
the third time and the result of the
subquery is going to be one. So the same
thing going to happen. SQL going to
check it. Okay, we have a value. So this
row is allowed to be in the final
results and so on. The cycle going to
keep repeating for each row that's going
to be retrieved from the main query and
once we have processed all the rows, the
final result going to be presented in
the output. So what we have understood
so far the correlated subqueries is
always depending on the main query and
the subquery going to be executed for
each row that we're going to get from
the main query. So in this example we
have four rows and the subquery is
executed four times. So this is how the
correlated subquery works. It's a little
bit more complicated than the
non-correlated subquery. The
non-correlated subqueries are really
straightforward. So first the subquery
going to go and execute the database
only once and the output of the subquery
going to be like an intermediate results
that going to be used from the main
query. So the main query going to go and
query the intermediate results and in
the output we're going to get the final
results. So as you can see in the
execution of the non-correlated subquery
it is straightforward. There's no
iterations everything going to be
executed only once. So now if you
compare them side by side you can see
that with the non-correlated subquery it
is completely independent from the main
query. So that means the subquery going
to be executed only once and after that
SQL going to go and as well execute the
main query only once using the result
from the subquery. But on the left side
the subquery is going to be executed
multiple times and it is completely
depending on the main query and there is
like an iteration for each row that's
going to be retrieved from the main
query. So the process going to be
cycling until all the rows are processed
and this is exactly how the correlated
and the non-correlated subqueries work
in SQL. All right. So now let's have the
following task and it says show all
customer details and find the total
orders of each customer. We have already
solved this task and you know in scale
we don't have only one query in order to
solve something. We have multiple ways
in order to do it. So we solved this
task before using the subqueries and the
joins. Now we're going to go and solve
this task using subquery in the select
clause and as well using the correlated
subqueries. So again let's do it step by
step. It's very simple. First we need
all the customer details. So as we
learned select star from sales
customers. So if you execute it you will
get all the details of all customers.
Now we need to find the total number of
orders of each customer. Now before we
have solved this using a simple query
where we have used the count function
together with a group I but this time
we're going to do it little bit
different. So let's go and write query
saying select count star from the table
sales orders. So now let's go and
execute it. With that we have the total
number of orders. So let's go and take
this sub query and use it in the select.
So we are using it as a scalar subquery.
So let's just put it over here. And this
is the main query. And in order to make
this as a subquery, what we're going to
do, we're going to have the parenthesis
and we're going to say the total sales.
So now let's go and execute it. So now
as you can see, we have here all the
details about the customers and we have
the total sales. But we have one issue.
We don't need just the total order. We
need the total orders for each customer.
So each customer has different total
orders. So we cannot have like the
following setup. We cannot say group by
customer ID. And then you have like here
the customer ID and so on. So if you go
and execute it, you will get a problem.
And that's because if you go and execute
this subquery over here, you will get
like multiple rows and multiple columns.
So you have like a table query. And this
type of subquery is not allowed to be
used in the select clause, right? We
have to have only scalar
subquery. So that's why we cannot do
that. So we have to go and remove all
those stuff.
But we can go and solve it using the
correlated subqueries. So now the
subquery is completely independent from
the main query. So in order to correlate
it, what we're going to do, we're going
to go and connect it. So I'm going to
give aliases for the tables and I'm
going to say where the customer ID equal
to the customer ID from the main query
from the customers. So again we are
connecting the customer ID from the
orders in the subquery with the customer
ID from the table customers that comes
from the main query. So now we are
saying okay execute this only for a
specific customer not for the whole
table. So let's go and execute it. So
now in the output we have the total
sales for each customer and we don't
have here like the total sales in the
whole table orders and that's because
what is happening for each row the
subquery going to be executed. So for
the customer number one this query going
to be executed like this count the total
number of orders where the customer ID
equal to the one. So let me just show
you what this means. If I go and remove
this from here and just put the number
one. So if I go and execute this, you
will see the customer ID one has three
orders. And let's just put it back and
execute. And the same thing going to
happen for each customer. So for each
customer, for each row, this subquery
going to be executed and it can be
filtered with the customer ID that comes
from the main query. So this is another
way in how to solve this task using the
correlated subqueries. So now let's
summarize and understand quickly what
are the differences between the
non-correlated and the correlated
subqueries. So now if you are talking
about the definition the non-correlated
subquery are subqueries that are
independent of the main query but in the
other hand the correlated subqueries are
dependent of the main query. And now if
you're talking about the execution the
non-correlated subquery is going to be
executed only once and then the results
going to be used by the main query but
by the correlated subqueries the
subquery going to be executed for each
row that we have from the main query.
And as we learned for the non-correlated
subqueries we can execute it on its own.
So we can go and select it and execute
it. But the correlated subqueries we
cannot execute it on its own. So we have
to execute always the whole thing. And
if you are talking about which one is
easier, I think it's clear that the
noncorrelated subqueries are easier to
write and to read. And in the other
hand, the correlated subqueries are
harder to read and as well it's complex.
Now, if you're talking about the
performance of the database since the
correlated subqueries can be executed
only once, this of course going to lead
you to have better performance because
things are really straightforward and
not complicated. But in the other hand
with the correlated subqueries there is
more effort because SQL has to check a
lot of stuff and the subquery going to
be executed many times. So the
noncorrelated subqueries are faster. We
use the noncorrelated subqueries in
order to do static comparison. So the
value that we are getting from the
subquery is executed only once and we
will get only one static value in order
to use it for filtering and so on. But
in the other hand we use correlated
subqueries in order to do rowby row
comparison. And since we don't have here
a static value each time the subquery
going to run we're going to have
different results. This going to add
more dynamic to the filters and we don't
have a static value. So those are the
big differences between the
non-correlated and the correlated
subqueries. All right. So now after we
understood the concept of the two types
correlated and non-correlated subqueries
we're going to go now and cover the last
operator for the subqueries. We have the
exists. So what is exist
operator? All right. So now we're going
to talk about a very interesting
operator function in SQL the exists. So
now in some scenarios as you are
querying the data from one table you
would need to go and check whether the
rows of this table exist in another
table. So that means you are checking
like the existence of your rows in
different table. And exactly in this
scenario we go and use subqueries
together with the operator exists. So
the exist operator is very simple. It
just simply check whether the subquery
returns any results any rows. All right.
So now let's understand the syntax of
the correlated subqueries using the
exist operator. This can be a little bit
complicated but we're going to do it
step by step. Don't worry about it. So
let's start with the easy stuff. In the
main query we're going to go and write a
simple select. We are selecting few
columns from the table two. And now we
don't need all the data from table two.
We want to filter the table using the
wear clause. Now what we're going to do
after the wear clause, we're going to
write immediately another keyword called
exists. So we don't specify any column
before the exist like we have done in
the comparison operator or the in
operator. We don't need that because we
are not filtering based on a value. We
are filtering based on the logic. That's
why we have the word exist immediately.
And now directly after they exist, we're
going to go and define the subquery like
this. So we're going to start saying
select one from the table number one.
Well, it is not like a must or
something. But it is very commonly used
to specify here a one. We are not using
the subquery in order to retrieve
informations from the table one. We are
just testing whether the subquery going
to return a value or not. And we don't
care about the returned value. It could
be one, it could be column, it could be
anything. So we don't care about the
data that is retrieved. We are just care
whether the subquery is returning
anything. So that's why we go and write
any value like here a one. So now we are
not done yet. This subquery is not yet
connected to the main query. We have
somehow to go and connect them together.
And we can do that using the wear clause
where we go and connect the ID from the
table one from the subquery with the ID
from the outer query from the main
query. And with that we are building
like a relationship between the subquery
and the main query. So with that the
subquery is now depending on the values
from the main query because here we have
the table 2 id. So the ids from the main
query going to filter the subquery. So
this is the syntax of correlated sub
queries using the exist where we are
making the subquery depending totally on
the main query. So let's understand how
exist works. So now for each row that we
have from the main query, it's going to
trigger and cause an execution of the
subquery. This subquery going to help us
to evaluate this row. So we are testing
this row. Now if the subquery doesn't
return anything, so there is no results,
what can happen? The row that we are
evaluating from the main query will be
excluded from the final results. But now
in the other hand if the subquery is
returning a value so we have like some
kind of results then this row that we
are evaluating going to be included in
the final results. So the subquery is
used in order to do a test. Do we have a
results or we don't and based on this
SQL either going to include or exclude
the row from the final results. So this
is the logic behind the exist in SQL.
All right. So now we're going to go and
solve the same task using the exists. So
the task says show the details of orders
made by the customers in Germany. So we
have already solved this task using the
in operator and the subquery. Now we're
going to go and solve it using the
exists. So again we're going to have the
same logical steps that we have done
before. So first we're going to go and
select all the details from the table
sales orders. So let's execute it. And
with that we have all the orders and all
the details. But of course we don't need
all those informations. We need only the
orders that's made by customers from
Germany. So that is the first query.
Let's go and construct the second query.
We're going to say select star from
sales customers. But we don't need all
the customers. We need only the
customers from country equal to the
value Germany. So let's go and execute
it. So now we have all customers that
come from Germany. Now we have to go and
put those two queries together in order
to get the final results. So as we
learned before the second query going to
be our subquery. So it's going to be
supporting the first query in order to
filter the data. So the first query
going to be our main query. Let me just
make this smaller and the text as well.
Now we don't need all the orders, right?
We need only the orders where the
customer come from Germany. So we need
the work clause. So now we can have the
filter logic like this. Show the order
details only if the customer ID exist
from the subquery. And now we have to go
and put our subquery. So our subquery
going to be this one over here. So let's
just move it to the right side. And in
order to have it as a subquery, we have
to close the parenthesis. And now since
exist is correlated subquery, we cannot
have it like this. we have to go and
connect the subquery together with the
main query. So now the subquery is
currently independent from the main
query because we want to check each
order information from the order table
to check whether the customer exist in
the sub query. We're going to go and add
the condition like the following. And
now it's like the joins we have to go
and connect the customer ids together.
So we're going to go over here and give
it like an alias and as well for the
subquery. And now we're going to say
customer ID from the orders should be
equal to the customer
ID from the subquery the table customers
like this. So again this customer ID
come from the subquery and this customer
ID comes from the main query. So now
since we are using the subquery only in
order to test the existence of the
customer. So if the subquery returns
anything or not, it doesn't matter what
you are selecting in the subquery. So so
you can go with the star or a column or
any static value. But for some reason
all the SQL developers decided to go
with the static value one. And of course
you can go and add like a column like
the customer ID but it's like
unnecessary step for the SQL in order to
retrieve the information from the
customer ID. So it's going to be way
faster for SQL if you say okay select
one. So let's stick with the best
practices. Use the one value if you are
working with exist. So this is our sub
query and I think we have everything.
Let's go and execute it. Now as you can
see in the output we got all the orders
where the customers come from Germany.
Now of course if you want to go and try
another value and execute you will get
exactly the same results. So it doesn't
matter which value you are using. So
with that we have solved the task this
time using the exists. Now if the task
says show the details of orders made by
customers that don't come from Germany
it's going to be very simple. We're
going to go and use the operator not
before the exist. So where not exists.
So now we are flipping the whole logic
and we are saying there should be no
matching with the subquery. So now if
you go and execute it you will get all
the orders where the customers don't
come from Germany by simply using the
not logic. And there is one more thing
that is annoying about the correlated
subqueries. If you compare to the
non-correlated subqueries as we learned
before, let me go back to the n
operator. Now this is a non-correlated
subquery. And if I go and select only
the subquery, I can go and execute it
independently. So I can go and check the
intermediate results and like validate
my query. But the problem with the
correlated subquery, I cannot go and
highlight the subquery and then go and
execute it. And that's because in the
syntax of the subquery we are adding a
column that is outside our subquery that
come from the main query. So this piece
of information currently for the SQL is
unknown and that's why we are getting
this error because SQL saying okay I
don't know where this column come from.
So this is little bit annoying using the
correlated subqueries you cannot go and
test the intermediate results. But how I
usually do it I go and test like an
intermediate result for only one row. So
for example, I'm going to go and pick
like a customer here. For example, two.
So I'm going to go and say okay, the
customer ID should be equal to two. So
let me just remove this from here. I got
this value from the main query. So if I
go now and execute it, I can see here.
Okay, the subquery is not returning
anything because there is no such a
value. So with that, I'm just testing
like one row. And of course in order to
make this working I have to go and add
as well the column from the main query.
So this is why correlated subqueries are
a little bit more hard to understand
compared to the non-correlated because
we cannot go and test the intermediate
results like we can do there. So this is
another way on how to solve this task
using a correlated subqueries with the
operator exists. Okay. So now let's see
step by step how SQL executed the
correlated subqueries using the exists
operator. So now this time SQL will not
start with the subquery. SQL going to go
and start immediately with the main
query. SQL first going to identify the
main query and it going to go and
execute it. But it's going to executed
row by row. So the first row going to be
the first customer. So now SQL going to
go and put the first customer under the
test. So now the next step is that SQL
going to go and pass the value of the
customer ID from the main query to the
subquery. So we are doing now exactly
the opposite. So now what going to
happen? SQL going to prepare the
subquery with the following information.
So we are saying the customer ID equal
to one and then SQL going to go and
execute it. So now once SQL executed
this query, we will get the result of
one and that's because we have here
multiple times where the customer ID is
equal to one. So there is rows in the
order table where the customer ID equal
to one. So now what going to happen? the
row from the main query going to pass
the test and this customer going to be
included in the final results. So now
the next step with that is going to go
and start testing the second customer.
So we're going to put this customer
under the test. Now we're going to go
and pass the value to the subquery. So
here we're going to have the value of
two and then SQL going to go and execute
this query and of course we will get a
result because we have here multiple
times where the customer ID equal to
two. So that's why in the output of this
subquery we will get one. So now it's
still going to say great we have a value
from the subquery that's why it is safe
to show this customer in the output. And
now it's still going to go to the next
row and so on. So for the next two
customers the same things going to
happen. All of those customers will have
a value from the subquery and that's why
they are all like passing the test. So
we will have it in the output. Now skill
going to go to the last row from the
table customers. So we have the Anna and
we're going to put Anna to the test. So
now what going to happen? SQL going to
go and pass the value five to the
subquery and SQL going to go and execute
this query to the table orders. Now once
SQL execute this query there will be
nothing returned and that's because we
don't have here in the table orders a
customer ID equal to five. And now SQL
going to say well we are not getting any
results from the subquery. That's why
this customer going to fail and SQL will
not show it at the output. So it will be
completely removed. So the customer Anna
is excluded because the subquery is not
returning anything. Customer ID number
five Anna does not exist in the table
orders. So it's going to fail the test
and we will have in the final results
only for customers. So this is exactly
the purpose of the exist. we are
checking and testing the existence of
our rows from another table from another
query. So this is how SQL executes the
correlated subqueries using the operator
[Music]
exists. All right friends, so with that
you have covered everything about the
subqueries, all the different categories
and types of the subqueries and now
we're going to do a quick recap about
the subqueries. So as we learned
subqueries is just simply a query inside
another query. And we use the subqueries
in order to break down a complex queries
into smaller, simpler, easy to manage
pieces that makes everything easier to
develop and as well to read. And as we
learned there are like many different
use cases for the subqueries. So we use
subqueries in order to create temporary
result sets to be used later from
another query. And we learned that we
can use the subqueries in order to
prepare the data before joining the
tables. And another very important use
case for the subquery is that we can use
it in order to filter our data using a
dynamic and as well complex filter
logics. And as we learned, we can go and
use the correlated subqueries using the
exist operator in order to check the
existence of data and rows from another
tables. and as well using the correlated
subqueries help us to do rowby row
comparison. All right my friends, so
with that we have covered an important
technique on how to nest your queries in
SQL. Now in the next step we're going to
talk about one of the most famous
technique on how to do multi steps in
SQL the city common table expression. So
let's go.
A city common table expression is a
temporary named result set like a
virtual table that could be used
multiple times within your query to
simplify and organize complex query. So
let's understand what this means using
the following sketch. So we have our
database tables like orders, customers
and so on. And in very simple scenario
we write a simple SQL in order to query
and retrieve the data from the database
and then in the output we will get the
result of the query. So this is the
simplest version of querying data. Now
things get complicated in our project
and we could have the following
technique in our query. So we still have
this section where we are saying select
from. But now inside our query we can
write another query like for example
select from where which is completely
nothing to do with the first query and
we can give this new query inside our
query a name CTE and we can call this
query a CTE query common table
expression. And the first query outside
this CDE we call it a main query. Now if
you check this we have like a query
inside another query. So now let's see
what is going to do with this. The first
thing is going to go and execute the
city query. So the city query going to
be executed and we're going to go and
retrieve few informations from our
database tables. Now the output going to
be available only in the query and the
output going to have the shape of like a
table like for example the sales. So now
the sales table and the orders tables
both of them are tables but one is
stored in the database and the other one
is an intermediate virtual table. So now
what can happen in the main query we can
go and start querying the sales table
the result from the CTE as any other
normal table like we do to the database
tables. So the main query going to go
and retrieve few informations and maybe
do some manipulations on top of the
sales table or let's say the CTE results
and of course the main query as well can
go and say you know what let's go and
query as well few tables from the
database. So the main query has two
sources of tables. Either get it
directly from the database or get it
from the table that is created inside
the query and then once everything is
done the final results of the main query
going to be presented for the user as a
final result. So as you can see the CTA
query has one task where it generates
like a table that lives inside our query
and we can go and use it as we want. So
now this intermediate table that is
created from the city has two features.
First this table will not live long. So
once the query ends what going to happen
is going to go and destroy this table.
So it will not be available afterward
and we are not able to query it anymore.
So SQL is doing here like a cleanup and
the second character about this let's
imagine that we have another side query
and it's retrieving tables directly from
the database tables. Now if you say
let's go and join those tables as well
with the sales from the first query well
it will not be working because SQL going
to say I don't know what you are talking
about and that's because the sales is
only locally available for the main
query in the same query. So that means
it's not globally available like the
database tables for any query. It is
dedicated only for the main query within
the same query. And now you might tell
me bar wait I have heard this story
before right? So this is an identical
story to the one that you have told us
about the subqueries. So what is exactly
the difference between the subquery and
the CTE? Well, you are totally right.
The story is identical between the
subqueries and the CTE but still there
are differences between them. So let me
show you few differences. Now let's put
them side by side. We have on the left
side the subqueries on the right side we
have the CTE. So now if you look on how
we wrote the CT and the subqueries you
can see that on the subquery we are
writing it from bottom to top. So first
we have this inner query the subquery
and then on top of it we have the main
query. But now on the other hand the CTE
we are writing it from top to bottom. So
first we write this inner query the CTE
query and then beneath it we're going to
go and write the main query. So this is
the first difference between them on the
way we write the query. So if I'm
thinking about subqueries, I start from
bottom to top. If I'm thinking about
CTE, I think from top to bottom. But
still you say, you know what, I don't
care how we write it. They are doing the
same thing. The subquery is introducing
an intermediate result that is used
later from the main query. And the same
thing for the CTE. It present like
intermediate table that is used as well
from the main query. Now let me tell you
the big differences between them is that
in the subquery the result can be used
only once. So you cannot have another
place in your main query where you go
and reuse the result from the subquery.
So you can use it maximum only in one
position and only once. But in the other
hand with the city technique, you can
think about the sales table as a virtual
table and not only you can use it in one
place in the main query, you can go and
use it in many other places. So you can
go and join it again. So that means I'm
using the output from the CTE query in
two different places in the main query
or maybe from three different places. So
you can have another place where you go
as well and query the sales table that
is only available in our query. So this
is the main and the most important
difference between the subquery and the
CTE. It's from the name common table
expression. We think about the result of
the CTE as a table. So we can go and
select it. We can go and join it with
any other table. So it is like a hidden
virtual table lives inside our query.
But the subqueries it's totally
different. It's a result only for one
position in the main query and it's used
only once. So that means if you want the
subquery in two three different places,
you have to go and write the subquery
three different times. So now you
understand why do we have CTE and why do
we have
subqueries. All right. So with that you
have understood what is CTE. Now the
question is why do we need CTE in the
first place? What is the main purpose of
the CTE? Let's go back to the sketch.
Now let's say in our complex SQL task we
have to do the following step. Step one
we have to go and join the tables
together in order to prepare all the
data that we need for the next step. And
now in the second step we have to go and
aggregate the data. Maybe we are doing
summarizations. Now in our task we have
to do as well different types of
aggregations based on different data.
And now what might happen is that we
have to go and join again the same
tables in order to prepare the data and
perform different type of aggregations
like for example the average which going
to be in the last step. Now we have
learned before we can go and use the
subqueries in order to make this logical
flow. So for step one, step two, step
three, we will have subqueries and the
final step going to be in the main
query. But now if we keep doing this
we're gonna have a problem and that is
we are repeating the same step more than
once. So we are joining the table twice
in step number one and three for
different purposes which cause us to
have two different subqueries that looks
exactly the same and this is exactly the
weak point of the subqueries. It might
introduce redundancies. So that means
the subqueries alone will not help you
to eliminate all the duplicates in your
code. But still we have different
techniques in order to solve this issue.
So what we going to do? We're going to
have only one step in order to join the
tables. And then this data going to be
used in the step two in order to
aggregate the data. And then we don't
need the step three of joining again the
data. We're going to reuse the step one.
And we're going to use the same data for
the step four which is aggregating the
data using average. And we can do this
with the help of the amazing CTE. So now
if you compare the steps in the
subqueries with the steps with the CTE
you can see with the CTE we are reducing
the number of steps which can lead to
reduce the size of the query. So now
again here in subquery we think about
the steps from bottom to top but in the
city it's the way around we think from
top to bottom. So that means the first
step on the top it's going to be joining
the tables and then below it going to be
step two and step three. And of course
since we are repeating the join we're
going to put it in CTE and then we can
use it twice in different places in the
main query. So as you can see there are
a lot of benefits of the CTE. It's like
the subqueries. We are breaking down
complex queries into smaller pieces that
are easier to write manage understand
and as well we have like a logical flow
from step one to three but with one more
benefit that we reduce the redundancies
of our code. So we don't have to join
the tables twice. Now I'm going to show
you a simple example how the CTE makes
our life easier in our query. We might
have to do different stuff like for
example we have to go and find the top
customers. So we can put this in one CTE
and we might need as well to calculate
what are the top products and we can put
as well this in another city. So you
don't have to put everything in one big
city. Then you can have the same issue
of having complex query. And let's say
that we have as well to find and
calculate the daily revenue. And for
this as well, we have to put it in one
CTE. Now once we have all those parts,
we can put everything together in the
main query. So now if you look to this
structure, you can see it's really easy
to understand this code. It's easy to
read. So CTE improves the readability of
our queries. So that means your code is
divided into clear sections making it
easier to understand what each part
does. Now if you keep looking to this we
have another advantage of the CTE
introduces modularity. So that means it
breaks your code into smaller manageable
parts. So this means instead of writing
one huge complex query you break it down
into smaller chunks using CTE. Each city
is like self-contained and handles
specific part of the problem and then
you can combine them all together in the
final query. It's like we are putting
together a puzzle piece by piece. And
now one very important advantage of the
CTE is the reusability. So that means we
can have a result set that is used
multiple times inside our query. So that
means you write the logic the code only
once and then use it in different places
inside your query. This is very
important. Not only you are wasting time
writing the same stuff over and over,
but also it reduces the errors and
mistakes that you might do if you are
repeating the same code. Especially if
later you want to go and change the
logic then you have to go and visit each
time you have done this logic and then
do the changes and you might forget some
places. That's why the CTE is amazing.
You can write the logic once and then
you go and reuse it in different places.
So these are the advantages of using
this technique the CTE inside your
[Music]
queries. So again you are at the client
side and you are data analyst. You are
writing a query where you are defining a
CTE called details and inside it you
have some logic and now in the main
query you are selecting the data from
the orders and as well you are joining
it with the details with the CTE
multiple times using multiple
conditions. Now once you go and execute
this query the database engine going to
read the query and say aha we have here
a CTE and it has the main priority. So
that means it going to go and execute
the CTE first. And now let's say that in
the city you are retrieving data from
the table orders and the table orders of
course in the disk storage inside the
user data. And now once the city is
completely executed the database engine
going to go and place the results in the
cache and it's going to name this result
as details. It's like a table name. So
the database engine is done with the
CTE. It's going to go now and grab the
main query and it's going to start
executing it step by step. So the first
step is that to get the data from the
orders. So since the orders exist in the
disk storage, it going to go and
retrieve it from there. Now the database
engine going to check the details. Okay,
we have it in the cache. That means we
don't have to search for it in the disk
storage and it going to start retrieving
the data from the details with high
speed. And now it's going to go to the
second step as well joining the data
with the details. So again the database
engine going to go to the cache and
going to see the table details and
retrieve the data based maybe in
different conditions. And then to the
third time as well we are joining to the
details and we're going to get the data
from the cache. So as you can see from
the main query we are using the result
from the CTE multiple times in different
places and the retrieval of all those
informations is happening in high speed.
So this is one big benefit of using the
CTE is to utilize using the high-speed
memory of the cache. So that means
retrieving the data from the cache from
the details is way faster than
retrieving the data from the disk
storage from the orders. Now once the
main query is completely executed the
result going to be returned to the
database engine and then it's going to
send it back to the client side and we
will see the results in the output. So
that's it. It's amazing right? This is
how the database server execute the
amazing technique the CTE behind the
scenes.
All right. So now for the CTE, we don't
have only one CTE. We have different
types of CTE. So mainly there are like
two types of CTE. We have the
nonrecursive CTE and recursive CTE. And
we can say for the nonrecursive CTE, we
have two subtypes. The first type is the
standalone CTE and the second one is the
nested CTE. And now what we're going to
do, we're going to deep dive into each
type. And we will start with the easiest
form of the CTE, the standalone CTE. It
is the simplest
form. So what is standalone CTE? It is a
CTE query that is defined and used
independently in the query. So that
means it is self-contained and it
doesn't depend on anything. It doesn't
depend on any other CTE or queries. So
that means we can run the standalone
query independently from anything inside
our query. So let's understand what this
means. We have our CTE. It's going to go
and query the database tables and in the
output we will get an intermediate
results and then the output can be used
from the main query. So the main query
going to query the intermediate results
and present in the output the final
results. So now if you check our CTE, it
is completely independent from anything
else. So it simply query the database
and it has one output. So since this CTE
is independent from anything else we
call it a standalone CTE. Now if you
compare this CT with the main query you
can see that the main query cannot be
executed alone. And that's because it
needs the result from the first query.
So we cannot say the main query is
independent cannot be executed alone. It
always depend on the city query. So that
means city first need to be executed
then the main query can be executed. So
this is what we mean with the standalone
city. It doesn't depend on anything
else. So now we can understand the
syntax of the CTE. So we have a very
simple query select from where. So it is
a very simple select statement. Now in
order to put it inside a CTE we can go
and use the with clause. So it starts
with the keyword with then the CTE name.
It's like a table name and then we have
the keyword as in order to say this CTE
is defined like the following. So this
is the definition of the CTE and it has
two parenthesis the starting and the
ending. So with this you are telling a
scale okay now we are talking about CTE
and it has a name. So if you are using a
query inside with clause we call this a
CTE query it is where you define the
CTE. Now of course we don't want only to
define a CTE. We want to use it. So
outside of this definition we can go and
use it like this. So we are saying
select from the CTE name. So that means
we want to select the data from the
result of the CTE. And here it's very
important to use exactly the same name
as you define it in the width clause. So
if you leave it like this, we can call
this the main query. It is the place
where we use the CTE. So this is the
syntax of a very simple CTE in SQL.
Okay. So now what we're going to do,
we're going to have like a task that's
going to keep progressing through this
section. So we're going to start with
the first step and we will keep adding
steps as we progress in the CTE. So now
the first step in this task says find
the total sales per customer. And now of
course since we have only one step, it
makes no sense to use the CTE. But we
will use it since we know that there
will be different steps later. So let's
start doing that. Now before I use any
CTE, I would like just to write our
query first. So we need the total sales
for each customers. It's very simple. So
we're going to go and select and what do
we need? Let's go and get the customer
ID and we need to do aggregations on the
sales. So summarize the sales and we're
going to call it total sales from the
table. And now since this is our first
query, we have to get the data from our
database. So we don't have any other
option. Our data going to be in the
sales orders. So let's go and get it.
And don't forget to group by for the
aggregation. We are grouping by the
customer ID. That's it. Let's go and
execute it. And as you can see in the
output, nothing is fancy. We are just
aggregating the sales by the customers.
So with that, we have solved the task.
But now I would like to put my query in
a CTE. And that's because later we're
going to add more steps. So let's put
our query in a city. And in order to do
that, we're going to start with the with
keyword. And now we have to define the
name of the CD. So I'm going to call it
city
total sales like this. And then
afterward we're going to say as and then
we have to go and add the parenthesis at
the start and as well at the end. And
with that we are telling SQL this query
is a CTE query. So that means the SQL
should store the result of this query in
a cache in memory to be used later in
the main query. our CTE and of course
what is missing is the main query and
you have to do it exactly after the
definition of the CTE. I will just make
here a small comment about the main
query. Uh let me just make this smaller
like this. And now we have to go and
have a very simple select
statements from. And now I would like to
get more details from the customers
table. So I will just go now to the
customers. So now we are not querying
the CTE right? We are just querying the
database table that we have and I would
like to get from the customer the
customer ID and the first name and let's
go and get as well the last
name. So now if we go and query this
what happens in the output we are
getting the data actually completely
from the database table the customers
and of course we are not using at all
the CTE inside our main query. Of
course, we can do that, but it's just
waste of like space in the memory
because SQL did execute this and stored
it in the database memory. And of
course, we would like to use the city in
our main query. So, let's go and do
that. So, let's go and do a join, but
this time we're going to join the data
from the CTE. So, let's go and get the
name and I will just call it CTS. So
what we are doing now we are joining the
physical table the customers with the
virtual table that we have created with
the CTE that exist only in our query and
of course not only we are joining the
tables we would like to get the
informations from the CTE. So CTS and we
need only the total sales. So total
sales. So that means those three columns
comes from our database table customers
and only this column the total sales
comes from our CTE. So let's go and
execute the whole thing. Now as you can
see in the output everything is working.
We have the three columns from the table
customers and we have the total sales
for each customer and this total sales
comes from our city. Now as you can see
the last customer has a null over here
and that's because in the table orders
we don't have the customer five. And now
you might say you know what I would like
to see the intermediate result from the
CTE because what we are seeing now in
the output is the final result from the
main query. So now what we can do in
order to see the result of the CTE we're
going to mark the query in the CTE of
course without any parenthesis or the
width. So just the query and execute it.
And with that you can see in the output
the intermediate results that we are
passing to the main query. And as you
can see we don't have here customer
number five. That's why in the final
results we are getting null and that's
of course because we are using the lift
join. So if I execute the whole thing
you can see we are getting the customer
five over here with the null. So as you
can see is very simple. We just treat it
as any normal database table. But this
table is created from our query that we
have defined in the city over here. Now
of course in the city you can use any
kind of clauses like select from join
group by having everything that you want
window functions all aggregate functions
but there is only one restriction you
cannot go and use the order by clause so
you cannot sort the data in the city so
let's go and try it out let's go and say
order by and let's say I want to sort by
the order ID for example so let's go and
execute it you can see here SQL is
saying Okay, I cannot do it for you
because order by is not allowed in many
things. So you cannot use it in views,
in sub queries, in comment table
expressions, the CTE over here. So it is
not allowed. You cannot use order by in
the CTE. But of course you can go and
sort the data in the main query. So if
you go over here and say order by
customer ID. So if we execute it, it's
going to be working. So in the main
query you can use order by but in the
CTE this is the only thing that you
cannot use inside the city. So that's
it. This is our first CTE in this
section. All right. So this is the
simplest form of the CTE the standalone.
Now we can have not only one CTE, we can
have multiple
CTE. So it's going to look like this. We
have our database and this time we don't
have only one CTE. We have multiple
CTEes in our query and each CTE is going
directly to the database and it will
query the database in order to prepare
the intermediate results. So in this
example four CDEs is going to the
database and preparing four different
intermediate results and of course SQL
going to execute it from the top to the
bottom. So first the CD 1 then 2 3 four
but they have nothing to do with each
others. So now once we have all the four
intermediate results the main query
going to go and retrieve all those
informations and do some magic in order
to prepare the final result for the end
user. So now by looking to this sketch
you can understand all those CTE are
independent from each others. So there
is no nesting or something. Each CTE is
self-contained and it could be executed
on its own without depending on any
other results from any other CTE or any
other query. So it goes directly to the
database and get the data. So that's why
all of them are standalone CDs. And
since we have multiple CDs, then it is
standalone multiple CDs. That's it. It's
simple. So now let's check the syntax of
the multiple standalone cities. So we're
going to start writing our first city.
So it start with the with clause and
then we have the city name and then the
logic of our city. So nothing new. This
is how we define the city. And then in
order to use it, we're going to have our
main query where we select from our new
city and we make sure we are using the
name of our city. So nothing new. Now in
order to add another city to our query,
what we're going to do, we're going to
go after the definition of the city. And
below it, we're going to go and start
defining the city too. But this time, as
you can see, we are not using the width
clause. We are using a comma. So that
means only the first city going to be
using the with clause in order to tell
SQL we are talking about CTE. All the
other CDEs you're going to separate it
using the comma. So the syntax going to
be comma instead of with then the name
of the CTE and then we're going to say
as the following definition. So we're
going to write here the query of the
second CTE. So now of course if you want
to go and add more CTE you go and use
the comma below it and as well you
define the third city. So you can have
as much cities as you want and always
separate it with comma but only the
first city start with the width. And of
course in the main query we can go and
use the results from the city 2 where we
are for example here joining the data
between the city 1 and city 2. So as you
can see in the main query here we are
like collecting the data from these
different cities in order to do the
final step in the main query. It start
with the width. So SQL understands okay
now we are talking about CTE and once
SQL sees after the parenthesis a comma
SQL can understands okay now we are
talking about another city and now if
you don't go and use a comma after the
parenthesis SQL can understands okay we
don't have any more CDEs the next query
it's about the main query so this is how
you create multiple standalone CTE all
right so now back to our task where we
are creating like a report step by step
so now we have in the task a second step
where it says find the last order date
for each customer. So now we have to go
and add one more information about our
customer. So when the last time the
customer did order. So how we going to
do it? Now we have to add this to our
query. And I would like to use as well
the CTE in order to have this logic. So
as we learned from the first task, this
is the first step in order to find the
total sales for each customer. And here
we have the main query. Now I would like
to put now in between another CTE. And
as we learned from the syntax, we have
to go and add a comma. We cannot go and
use the width again. And we have to give
it a name. So let's call it CTE and last
order. So latex and we have to define
it. So as and then double parenthesis.
And now in between we have to go and add
our logic. So now we have to focus only
in this logic. So forget about the other
CTE and the main query. So we have to
find the last order date for each
customer. So we're going to go and query
again the table orders. So what do we
need? We need the customer ID. We need
the order
date from our table sales orders. So
that's it for now. Let's just select it
and execute it. And now with that you
can see all the customers and as well
all the orders. But we would like to
have the highest order for each
customer. And we can go and use our
aggregate function, the max function. So
what we're going to do it's like here at
the top. So we have to go and use the
function max and group up by the
customer ID. So group up the customer
ID. Uh let me just shift it like this.
And let's give it the name last order.
So like this. And as you can see I'm
just selecting now only my query. I'm
not selecting everything. And I keep
executing in order just to check the
results before we integrate it in the
main query. So now as you can see we
have for each customer one row and we
have as well the highest order for each
customer. So with that we have solved
this subtask. So as you can see it's
really easy to extend. I'm just making
like another box and I'm adding inside
it the business logic that I want and
this going to solve one problem from the
whole task. So you feel now exactly the
power of the CTE. We are making complex
logic but still it's easy to add. Now
imagine you are not doing this. You are
always extending one big query. It's
going to be really hard to extend and
that's why a lot of SQL developers
really love using CTE and they like use
it in each query or in each task that
they have. So we have solved this task
and we have to go now integrated in the
main query. It's going to be very
simple. So we're going to get over here
and we will go and just add another
join. So we're going to join it with the
city and as you can see SQL now is
offering it as a table even though it is
not a physical table that exists in our
database. It only lives inside our data
but still SQL treat it as a table. And
this is exactly what we are doing. We
treat those informations as table. So
city the last order and I will call it
CL. And then of course we have to go and
do the same condition like here. So the
CLLO customer ID should be equal to the
customer ID from the first table, the
customers. And of course we have to go
and add this new information to the main
query. So
CL the last order. So now what we're
going to do, we're going to go and
execute the whole thing. So we have now
two CDs and as well our main query. So
let's go and execute it. Now again let's
check the data. The first three columns
comes from the physical table customers.
The fourth one, the total sales comes
from our first city over here. So from
here and the last order comes from our
new city that we just defined the city
number two. So as you can see guys,
everything feels like organized and
structures and we have like flow and of
course those cities are standalone
cities. So we can go always and select
the city and execute it separately. It
doesn't need anything else from outside
this query. It just needs the tables
inside your database. So guys again here
pay attention if you want to add more
CDs use the comma. You cannot go and use
for example here I another width. So if
I execute it I will get an error. So you
have to separate it with this comma. And
another mistake that I do frequently
that I forget and go add here like to
the last CTE a comma and this happens to
me if I'm using a lot of CDEs. So if I
go and do it like this, I will get as
well an error because the main query
doesn't need a comma. So the last city
should not has a comma after the
parenthesis. So I just removed it and
execute. So guys with us we have now
multiple cities inside our
query. All right. So now what is a
nested CTE? It is a city inside another
city. So it's kind of like subqueries, a
query inside another query. So not only
a main query can use the result of CTE
another CTE can use the result from a
CTE and of course the nested CTE is like
a main query is depend on other query
that means you cannot go and select it
and run it independently from the query.
So always you have to run the CTE inside
it first before seeing the result of the
nested CTE. Okay. So now let's
understand what this means. Again we
have our database and we have a city
query that goes directly to the database
and queries the data from there and in
the output we will get the intermediate
results. And now in this scenario this
time we will not have only one
intermediate results because we have
many different steps. We need another
intermediate results before everything
is prepared for the main query. So that
means we have another step that's going
to be built up on top of the first
intermediate results. So that means we
can have another CTE that's going to be
quering the results from the first CTE
and build on top of it another
intermediate result. So as you can see
here we have CTE1 and CTE2 and that
means now we have like two intermediate
results. And now of course we can go and
add CTE 3 4 and so on. But now let's say
that the CTE2 going to prepare the final
intermediate result for the main query.
So now the main query going to go and
query the second intermedator results
and it's going to do the final step
where the final result can be presented
for the user and of course if it is
needed the main query can access not
only the second intermediate result from
the second CTE but also the first
intermediate result from the CTE1. Now
we call the first CTE a standalone CTE
because it doesn't depend on any
intermediate results. It goes directly
to the database and gets the data. But
now since the second city is completely
depending on the city one. So this time
we're going to call this CTE a nested
CTE because we cannot go and execute it
on its own. It always depends on the
city one. And of course the main city is
depending on everything. So as you can
see we're using the CTE we're going to
go and build like a chain. So this is
what we mean with the standalone city
and nested city. Okay. So now let's
understand the syntax of the nested
city. So we start as usual with the
definition of the first city using the
with clause and then the name of the
city and the definition of the city. So
here it's nothing new. Now we go and
define the second city as we learned
using the comma then the name of the CTE
and the definition. So this is our CTE
number two. So now the second CTE is
depending on the results of the first
CTE. So how we going to do it? It's very
simple. Now for the CTE number two,
we're going to select the data from the
CTE number one. And with that, we are
making the second city depending on the
first one. So this means the second CTE
is getting the data from the first one
and it's querying the data in order to
do the second step. And with that we are
nesting one CTE in another. And the CTE2
is completely depending on the first
one. So again we call the first CTE as a
standalone CTE because it doesn't depend
on anything. We can execute it on its
own and it just need the data directly
from the database. But the second city
since is completely depending on the
city number one we call it a nested
city. So they are very similar. We are
just selecting the data from the city
number one. And now comes our main
query. And of course it's going to go
and use the data from the second step.
So it's going to go and select the data
from the city number two. But it's still
of course it's not a rule. It can go and
access the data and select the data from
the city number one. So this is how we
can create a nested city in SQL. All
right guys, back to our project where we
are creating a report about the
customers and we would like to add one
more step. So the task is rank the
customers based on total sales per
customer. So this is one more step
inside our projects and we would like to
go and use as well the CTEs in order to
implement this step. So now what do we
need? We need to rank the customers
based on total sales for each customer.
So here like we have two steps. First we
have to calculate the total sales per
customer and then we have to go and rank
it based on this information and of
course the sales are stores inside the
orders. So now let's go and start
implementing the CDE. So we're going to
have a comma and we're going to call it
CTE customer
rank as and then we're going to go have
the parenthesis and inside it we're
going to develop now the logic. So first
we have to go and aggregate the data by
the total sales. So select customer ID
and then sum the
sales from the table sales orders and
then of course group
by the customer id. And now I can hear
you even telling me bar we have already
done this. We have already this logic.
So why we are repeating? If we go to the
first CTE you can see we have already
done that. And you are totally right. We
have already the logic. So it makes no
sense to repeat it again. And if we do
this then we didn't understood the power
of the city. So we don't have to repeat
the same logic and we can reuse the city
inside another city. So now we don't
need all those stuff. We can go and
focus immediately with ranking the
customers. So first let me just select
the data from the first city. So I'm
going to go and select. So what do we
have? We have customer
ID and we have total
sales. And we're going to select it this
time not from any physical table. We're
going to select our city. So like this.
And now what we're going to do, we're
going to go and select the whole thing
and execute it. Well, this is the issue
of nesting cities. Sadly, this CTE is
completely depending on the first city.
So we cannot go and execute it on its
own. And this is of course very annoying
because each time I execute the query by
the end of the query SQL gonna go and
destroy all the CTE. So in the memory we
will not find the CT and that's why once
I executed it SQL don't know anything
about this city. And in order now to see
the result of this we have always to
execute as well with it the city that
I'm using. So what I usually do I go
over here and make everything in comment
in the main query and now I can go and
execute the whole thing and now I will
see in the output the outcome of this
nested city. So this is the big
difference between the standalone cities
like here and the nested. So now let's
go back to our task. We have to rank
those sales based on the total sales. So
we can go and use the rank function from
the window function. So rank over and
now we don't have to partition the data.
We just want to sort the data by the
total sales
descending. So like this the highest
sales going to get the rank number one.
So let's go and give it the name as
customer rank. Now as you can see we
have a really nice rank beside those
informations. Customer three has the
highest sales and customer two has the
lowest total sales. So with that, as you
can see, we didn't repeat ourself. We
just reused another CTE in our current
city. And this is exactly why this
technique is very amazing in order to
reduce redundancies and to reduce the
complexity of the whole query. So nested
are annoying to execute, but they reduce
the redundancies of our code. Now we are
done with our logic. We tested
everything. So what we're going to do,
we're going to go and integrate it in
our main query. So let me just remove
the comments from here and let's go and
add it in the main query. So we will do
the same thing. We're going to go and do
a left join with the last city that we
just created. So let me just call it
CCR and the same conditions. We are
always joining on the customer ID. But
don't forget to rename the alias. So it
is CCR customer ID equal to the customer
ID from the first table. And of course
we have to go and select the new
information. So CCR dot customer rank.
And now let's go and execute the whole
thing. Now as you can see in the results
those three columns comes from the
customers table. The total sales comes
from the first city. The last order from
the second city and the customer rank
comes from our nested city that we just
created. So guys, it is not a simple
task creating such a reports because it
involves different aggregations and
different functions, but our work is
organized. As you can see, it's very
simple. We have step one, step two, step
three, and the main query. And it's
really easy to add more components to
our query. Now, I would like really to
keep practicing using those nested
queries. So, we have the following task.
We would like to add one more step in
our report. segment the customers based
on their total sales. So I would like to
implement this as well using CTE. So
let's go and solve it. We want to go and
add a new CTE. It's going to be CTE
customer
segments as and then we have to go and
define our logic. Now if you check our
task, it has two parts. We have to find
the total sales and then we have to
segment the customers based on this
information. So it is something very
similar to what we have done in the step
three. So that means we don't have to go
and calculate again the total sales. We
have to go and use as well our amazing
first city. So let's go and do it. What
do we need? We need the customer ID like
this. And let's do basic segmentations
using the case win. So let's say case
when the total sales if it's higher than
100 then let's say the customer going to
belong to the group high and let's go
and add another category. If it's not
higher than 100 if it is higher than
50 then the customer going to belong to
medium. And if the total sales is less
or equal to 50. So what's going to
happen? We're going to say else the
customer belong to the low category. So
that's it. We're going to have an end
and let's call it customer
segments. All right. But of course we
have to go and select it from a table
and it's going to be our city. So total
sales and let's put it in our new city.
And I would like to test it before like
putting it inside our main query. That's
why I will put everything in comments in
my main query since it is a nested city
sadly. And we will just go and select
our new nested city like we have done
before. So let's go and execute it. Now
as you can see in the output we have two
customers with the category high and two
customers with the medium. But in order
to make sure that everything working
perfectly, I would like to go and add
the total sales just to see the numbers.
So let's go and execute it. Well, you
can see everything is correct. So those
customers having higher than 100 in the
total sales and those two having higher
than 50. But let's go and change stuff
around. I would like to have it like 80
as a medium just in order to have a low.
So with that the customer number two
having a lower sales than 80. That's why
we are getting the segment low.
Everything is done and we have segmented
the users into different categories. So
I don't need to test anymore. Let's go
integrate it in our main query. So we're
going to do the same things over here.
We're going to say lift join and we're
going to get our new CTE. So CCS and we
have to do the join condition. Don't
forget to change it. And we have to
select our new nice information. It's
going to be the customer segments. And
now we can go and execute the whole
thing. So we have now like four
different cities and one main query. And
now we can see in the output we got all
three informations from the table
customers. The first city, the second,
third and this is our new column that we
just created. So again we have done this
using a necessityd like this. Let me
just add
it and it was really easy to extend and
to add to our report. All right guys, so
with us we have done like a many
projects where we have analyzed the
customer information based on different
aspects from our data and we have done
it like step by step and now you have
like a feeling on how to write complex
SQL queries using the help of the CTE
and we have done it like step by step.
So as you can see if you go through the
scripts you can understand okay it is
divided into multiple steps and each
block is responsible for one specific
problem of the whole report and this is
exactly the power of the CTE it
introduce modularity. So each CTE is
self-contained and talk about one issue
and this is amazing way on how to
organize your project using SQL and how
to structure your work.
All right, my friends. So, now let's
have a little break in order to have a
real talk about the city. But first,
some
coffee. And now I can say that I'm
working with SQL since really long long
time ago, over 15 years. And I can say
as well, I have met a lot of SQL
developers in different projects. And if
there is one thing that all those SQL
developers love is the CTE, they love
using it everywhere. like each time they
write a query they going to be writing
SQL CTE and of course it's fine it's not
a bad thing but the problem with that
they overuse it of course not all of
them but a lot of SQL developers overuse
using the CTE of course the CTE is very
powerful but with power comes great
responsibility
remember with great power comes great
responsibility so my advice for you
especially if you are new to the CTS try
to not add a new CTE each time you are
doing something new and I saw it a lot
like for each new calculation for each
new column they jump immediately and
create a new CT and what happens at the
end we can have like massive number of
CTE inside one query and the developer
thinks now everything is organized and
easy to read but believe me it's exactly
the opposite if you open any code and
you have a lot of CDEs and especially if
they are necessities it is impossible to
understand what is going on even if the
developer like describe each CTE and the
task of the CTE, it's going to be really
hard to understand and as well to read.
If everything is like nested and you
have like I don't know 20 cities in one
query. So it's going to be impossible to
read and to understand and as well
you're going to be using a lot of memory
and you might get bad performance. So my
advice for you try always as you are
creating new CDs to think about how
about to merge two CDEs in one. So it is
really always important to rethink and
refactor your CDEs in order to merge it
into one and to reduce the number of
CTE. But now if you ask me how many CTEs
are okay in one query, well I don't have
a magic number for that. But normally I
tend to say between three and five CTE
it's fine. So it's going to be easy to
understand and to read and so on. But
once you get more than five CTE then you
have to rethink your code. Maybe you
have to create another complete query so
you don't have to put everything in one
query. So this is my advice for you. Try
to not overuse the CTEs in your
projects. Not for each step always
refactor the CTE, consolidate them and
try to not have more than five CTEs in
one query. So that's my advice for you.
Be responsible using the CTE. And let's
go back to our course.
So with that we have learned the
standalone CTE and the NIST CDE and both
of them belongs to a type called
nonrecursive CTE. So what is a
non-recursive CDE? It means it is a city
that is executed only once. So there is
no repetitions or looping or anything.
So the SQL going to execute it in one go
and that's it. But in the other hand the
recursive city is exactly the opposite.
So a recursive city it is a
selfreferencering query that repeatedly
processing the data until a certain
condition is met and we usually use the
recursive city if we have like
hierarchical structure and we want to
navigate and travel through the
hierarchy. I know this might be
confusing but don't worry about it.
We're going to have very simple
examples. Now again we have our tables
in the database and we have a CTE. Now
the query of the CTE going to be
executed for the first time and in the
results we're going to have the initial
data from the CTE but it is not
everything yet. Now this intermediate
result is not ready yet for the main
query but instead of that it's going to
go back to the CTE and CTE going to
check whether the current results is
meeting a specific condition. So now if
the check says no it's not meeting the
condition what's going to happen the
city query going to be executed for the
second time. So as you can see we are
looping through the CTE. Now the result
of the second iteration the second
execution will be added to the
intermediate result. So now the
intermediate result has more data and
again before we can use it from the main
query it going to be checked from the
CTE. Does the result fulfill the
condition? If it's still no, then go and
execute the CTE again. So we're going to
have a third iteration and a new data
going to be added to the intermediate
result. So this is our third iteration.
Now it's going to be checked again from
the CTE. Did we fulfill the condition?
If the answer is yes, then the loop
going to break and everything else. So
there will be no fourth iteration of the
CTE. So with that, the CTE says okay,
I'm done. This is the final result of
the intermediate result. then the loop
going to break and everything ends and
the city will not be executed for the
first time and now the city going to say
okay I'm done now my intermediate result
is ready to be used from the main query
and now nothing new happens the main
query going to go and retrieve the data
from the intermediate results and do
some magic in order to prepare the final
results so that means there will be no
iterations or looping inside the main
query the looping going to be happen
only in the CTE and that's why we call
it recursive CTE. So now if you compare
it with the other types, all other types
are always in one direction and all the
CTE is going to be executed only once
but the recursive CTE going to be keep
looping until the condition is met and
only then it's going to forward the data
to the main query. And normally we use
the recursive CTE if you are navigating
through hierarchical structure. So if
you have in your data like hierarchal
structures, you can go and use the
recursive CTE in order to navigate
through it. So this is the recursive
city. Okay. So now let's check the
syntax of the recursive CTE. It is a
little bit complicated but we're going
to do it step by step. So what do we
have? We have a query and we would like
to put it in a city. So we're going to
have the usual stuff with clause the
name of the city and as and then the
query. So this is the definition of our
city. But now if you leave it like this
SQL going to execute it only once. But
we would like to make a loop iteration.
So in order to do that we have to go and
define a second select statement inside
our CTE like this. So we are selecting
the data and here we have to define a
breaking condition. So here in the
second query we are defining a condition
in order to break the loop otherwise
it's going to loop for infinite or the
system going to break. You could use it
in the wear clause or you can use it
even in an inner join because both of
them are filtering the data and you can
use it in order to break the condition.
All right. So now still there is
something missing. How we going to make
like things looping? Well, we have to
reference this CTE to itself. So what we
going to do? We're going to say the
second query going to select the data
from the same CTE. So that means we have
now a query that is quering itself. And
this is of course what we want. We want
to make iterations and we want to make a
loop. That's why we have to go and
reference it to itself. And now in SQL
you cannot have it like this. You cannot
have like two select statements in one
query. you have to connect it somehow.
That's why we can go and use the union
all or union depend if you want to have
duplicates or not. So now we call the
first query the anchor query. The anchor
query going to be the first query that
interacts with the database and provide
us the initial intermediate results. So
it is the starting point of the
iteration and we can say it is the first
step in the process. So this going to be
executed only once and it going to
provide us the initial step the first
step in the process. Now we call the
second step as a recursive query and we
call it like this because this query
going to be executed multiple times and
it will keep repeating and add data to
the intermediate results until the
condition is met or let's say there will
be no more data that is available to be
processed. So this is the syntax of the
city query for the main query nothing is
changed. So we have to go and use the
city name in the main query. So this is
the syntax of the recursive city. So
think about it like this. SQL going to
go and execute the anchor query only
once and then after that going to go
through the recursive query and keep
looping and looping and iterating until
a certain condition is met and then SQL
going to go out from the CTE. So this is
actually what we mean with the anchor
and recursive queries. All right. Right.
So now let's have a simple task in order
to understand the recursive city. So the
task says generate a sequence of numbers
from 1 to 20. So now let's do it step by
step. So that means we have to create a
loop from 1 to 20 and after 20 the loop
should stop. So let's go and do it. Now
the first step of the recursive CTE is
to build the anchor query. So the anchor
query is responsible for the first
iteration. So that means the first row
of the output. So what is the first
value between 1 and 20? It is the one.
So let's go and write a query that
generate the value one. So select and
we're going to say one as I'm going to
give it the name my number. So that's
it. Let's go and execute it. Now you can
see in the output we have the first
member of our sequence. And this is
exactly the task of the anchor query. It
retrieves the first step in the
iteration. So let's go and call
it
anchor query. Now the next step with
that we have to go and build the
iteration. So we need a CTE. So I will
build now the city. So we're going to
say with we're going to call it series
and then we're going to put everything
in parenthesis and then we're going to
go to the main query. So this is the
main query and we will go and select
everything from the Sirius the city. So
let's go and execute it just to make
sure that everything is working fine. So
we didn't create any loop or anything.
We have just created a city on top on
the anchor query and we just call it
from the main query. So now we come to
the second step of building the
recursive city. We have to build the
recursive query. So let's do it. I will
just make this little bit smaller. And
now before we start writing the query,
we have to go and use union
all in order to go and connect the
anchor query with the recursive query.
And let me say this is the
recursive query. So how we going to
build it? Let's go and start with the
select. And now next what I usually do I
just make sure that we are making a
recursive city. So I go with selecting
from and then we're going to use the
name of the current city so that we are
referencing the city to itself in order
to make the city recursive and to do the
looping. Now here comes the tricky part.
So we need to create like the sequence.
Now what is the current value? The
current value is one. Right? Now what do
we need? We need the second value in the
sequence which is two. So we can do it
by 1 + 1. So if you do it like this you
will get the output two. But actually
what we are doing here we are always
taking the current value and we are
saying plus one in order to generate the
next value. So in order to do that
instead of saying one we're going to
take the my number the current value and
we're going to add to it plus one in
order to generate the second value in
the sequence. So that means my number
always holds the current value and we do
the operation + one in order to generate
the next sequence. So having it like
this what we are doing we are generating
the sequence of numbers. Now if you go
and execute it like this let me just
execute it what will happen it going to
breaks because SQL will not allow it and
SQL set it to 100 iterations. So more
than 100 SQL going to break the query so
that we don't have infinite number of
looping. So this is bad because we
didn't define the breaking mechanism of
the looping. So now we have to define as
well in the recursive query how the loop
going to ends and we usually use a
condition. For example, we can go and
use the wear clause and we can say okay
keep looping and keep generating but
always check whether the value of the my
number is less than 20. And you might
ask okay it should be less or equal to
20 right? Well no because if you are
making less and equal to 20 what going
to happen once the my number is equal to
20 you are allowing one more iterations
where you will get in the output 21. So
that's why we are making it with 20. So
now let's go and execute it and let's
check the sequence. It start with 1 2 3
4 5 and until we reach the 20. So with
that we have solved the task. Again here
it's not that hard right? We are just
providing the initial step and then we
are providing the loop where we are
defining inside it how the loop going to
ends. Now there is one more thing that
you can do with the recursive CTE is to
define the limit of iterations. So for
example in your code if you say okay if
this iterates more than 10 times then
the SQL should breaks and stops. So you
can define for the SQL the maximum
number of recursions. So how we can do
that? We can do that in the main query.
So if you go over here and say option
then two parenthesis and then max
recursion and after that you can define
the limit. So for example let's go with
the 10. Now of course we are iterating
in our code now more than 20 but here we
are making the rule it should not
iterate more than 10. So let's go and
execute it. So now we can see that our
SQL breaks and it says the maximum
recursion is 10. So as you can see now
in the output we are getting the error
of having more than 10 iterations which
is not allowed. So with that you can
control how many recursions you can
have. Let's say that you would like to
have like thousand iteration. So if you
go over here and say you know what I
would like to have a sequence of 1,000.
If you let me just comment this out. So
if you execute it you will get an error
because the default is 100. But of
course you can go and increase the
maximum recursion. For example let's go
with 5,000s. in the output it will work
and you will get a sequence of 1,000. So
with this you can control how many
iterations are allowed in your query. So
that you have like a control on it.
Okay. So now we can understand step by
step how SQL executed the recursive
query. And here we have like flow
diagram in order to understand the
process the steps of executing the
recursive query. So let's go and do it.
Now in the start we have the first step
is to run the anchor query. So our
anchor query is just a select for the
value one. So in the output we will get
the value one in my number and as you
can see the anchor query going to be
executed only once. So there is no
iterations or anything. SQL executed
once and then goes to the next step. So
what is the next step? It's going to
execute the recursive query. So it's
going to go over here and now what going
to happen? We will get the current value
of my number. The current value is one.
and then we're going to add to it a one.
So 1 + 1 we will get from the recursive
query the two which is added to our
results. Now it's going to check the
condition is my number now smaller than
20. Well yes it's smaller than 20 and
what's going to happen since it's true
is going to go and reexecute the
recursive query. So now we are doing the
second iteration. So again it's going to
go to the recursive query and going to
say okay what is the current value of my
number? It is two. So 2 + 1 the second
iteration will give us the value three.
So as you can see each time the
recursive query is executed it is adding
more values to our result. So the same
question can be asked is now my number
smaller than 20. Well yes it is smaller.
Well what can happen is still going to
reexecute the recursive query. So SQL
going to keep looping and iterating and
adding values to the output until we
reach the value 20. So now SQL going to
ask is 20 my number now smaller than 20.
Well no. So it is false and what's going
to happen the chain will break and we
will not loop anymore. So it's going to
be the end of the city and this going to
be the final results that's going to be
used from the main query. So this is how
SQL executed this recursive CD. Okay. So
now let's have another task for the
recursive CD. This time it's going to be
a little bit more advanced. So the task
says show the employee hierarchy by
displaying each employees level within
the organization. So that means we have
to show for each employee for each row a
level that tells us the hierarchy of the
employee. So first let's go and explore
the table employees. So let's go and
select everything prompt sales
employees. Okay, let's go execute it. So
now by looking to the results we have
like few informations about the
employee. We have information about
which department the gender salaries but
here we have the key. It is the manager
ID. So this is like self referencing to
the same table. So for example the first
employee the value is null. That means
this employee has no manager which makes
this employee like the big boss, the
CEO. Then now by looking to the next two
employees, they have a manager ID one.
So who is the manager of those two? It's
going to be the first row, the manager
ID number one. So the manager ID number
one is the post of those two employees.
And then for the fourth one, we can see
the manager ID number two. So the
manager of Michael is actually Kevin,
the second row. And for Carol the
manager ID is three. That means Mary is
the manager of Carol. And this is
exactly what we can do with the
recursive CTE. We can use such
informations in order to create like a
loop. So let's go and do it step by
step. First we're going to start with
the anchor query as usual. So this is
the anchor query and here the first step
or the first record going to be the
highest manager which is the CEO, right?
The first record. So in order to select
now the only the first record what we
can say we can say where manager id is
null. So let's go and execute it. And
with that we have now the first row and
we can use this as the first step in our
iteration. So now let's go and pick few
informations in the select like the
employee ID and the first name and as
well let's go and get the manager ID.
And now we have to start creating the
levels. Right? So this is the first
level. So I'm going to have the value
one as let's have it like level. So our
CEO has the level number one. So let's
go and execute it. So now as you can see
Frank is the CEO and he is in the level
number one. So this is our anchor query.
Now we have to do the iteration right.
So we have to go and start creating the
city. So let's call it with CD employee
hierarchy and then as and then this is
the definition of our CD. So let me just
make it like this. And of course what do
we need? We need the main query.
So main query we will select
everything from our new city like this.
So let's go and test it. All right. So
now we have prepared the CTE and the
main query and of course the next step
with that we're going to go and build
the recursive query but first we need
the union all in order to connect the
two queries and recursive query and now
we can start building the logic. So now
we want to find all the employees where
their manager is the employee ID number
one right because they going to have the
second level in the hierarchy. So what
we're going to do, we're going to go and
select and we need the same stuff. So we
would like to get the employee ID, the
first name, and the manager ID. And we
need the level. So this going to be the
level number two. It's not correct yet.
I'm just want to show what this means
because we need to get the employee ID
and the first name and so on. We cannot
get it yet from the CT because in the
city we have only one employee. So we
still have to go to the database and
grab the next employees. So now I will
give this as an alias like E and I will
select it as well from those employees.
So so far we are not doing any recursive
yet right in the recursive query we're
still querying the database but now we
don't need all the employees from this
table we need all the employees where
the manager ID equal to one right now.
Of course, in order to get those
employees where the manager equal to
one. So we can do it with the workclouds
for example and say manager ID equal to
one. Let me just select this and query
it. Now we will get those two employees
where their manager is the CEO the top
manager. But of course we cannot do it
like this. What we're going to do we're
going to join this table with our
current CTE in order to make a loop. So
let me show you what I mean. We will
remove this. We're going to use the
inner join and we're going to reference
it from the CTE and let's give this the
name C H and we connect it like this. So
on we're going to say the manager ID of
the employee should be equal to the
employee ID. So the employee ID at the
start going to be the number one. So
it's going to be like
this employee ID. Now we are connecting
the manager ID with the employee ID and
we are as well reusing the CD inside
itself in order to make the iterations
and here we don't need the work clause
because the inner join going to filter
the data automatically as we learned the
inner join going to show only the
matching rows from the left and to right
so that mean there will be filtering. So
we are almost there but of course we
don't want to show it as a two. What
we're going to do, we're going to show
it like this. Level + one. So the
current level is one. The second
iteration going to be two. And the third
iteration going to be three. So I think
we have everything for our iteration.
Let me just check and make this smaller.
Now again we have here our anchor query.
This is only for the top level manager.
And then here we are just connecting the
managers with the employees. And we are
reusing the CTE in order to make the
effect of the loop. And as well we are
using the inner join in order to break
the loop once there are no more rows to
process. So let's go and execute it. Now
let's check the output. This is our top
manager. So level one. This information
comes from the anchor query. Then the
second iteration it is the employees
where the manager ID equal to one. So
it's going to be those two employees. So
those employees in our hierarchy are the
second level in our organization. And
then we're going to search for employees
where their manager ID is equal to
either two or three. And this is going
to be those two employees, Carol and
Miracle. And now to the third iteration,
we're going to search for all employees
where their manager ID equal to either
two or three. And now to the third
iteration, we're going to search for all
employees where their manager ID equal
to either two or three. And this going
to result having those two employees
because their manager ID is equal to
three or two and they're going to get
the level of three. And then after that
SQL going to try to search for employees
where their manager ID equal to five and
four and SQL will not find anything and
that's why it kind of breaks. So with
that we have solved the task. All right.
I totally understand if this is
complicated but now we're going to do it
step by step in order to understand how
SQL executed this and why we have done
it in this way. So again we have our
flow diagram. We start by running the
anchor query then the recursive query
and then we have a check. If the check
fails we iterate otherwise we end. So
let's do it step by step. Here we have
the table employees and beneath it we
have the result of the city. So the
first step it says we run the anchor
query and we run it only once. So it's
going to go to the anchor query and
start executing it. So here we are
selecting from the table employees but
we are making a filter on the manager
ID. So the manager ID should be null. So
that means we will get the record of
Frank and Frank going to be at the
output and we are saying the level of
this employee is one. So we will have
here at the level one. So this is the
output of the anchor query and that's
it. This will never be executed. Now we
go to the next step. Now we will run the
recursive query. So what's going to
happen in the recursive query we are
saying okay I would like to select as
well data from the employees and join it
with the city results but the join
should be an inner join so only the
matching data between the CTE and the
employees and now comes the join
condition and this is the key for this
iteration we are saying the manager ID
of the employee should be matching to
the employee ID from the CTE. So SQL
going to go and join the table with the
CTE. So now we have here only employee
number ID one. So it's still going to do
it step by step searching for any
matches. So for the first one we don't
have a match because the manager ID is
not equal to one. So that's why it will
not be included in the result. The
second row here the manager ID is equal
to one and this is a match with the
employee ID. So SQL going to take it and
put it at the output. Not only that, SQL
going to increase the level. So we have
here the current value is one. So level
+ one. What can happen? We will get the
value two. We are still in the same
iteration. We are not iterating yet. So
this is the first iteration of the
recursive query. So until the whole join
is done to the next row, we have a match
as well because the manager ID is equal
to one. And we're going to have the same
thing. The level going to be as well too
because the value of the level didn't
change. It's still the current value is
equal to one. And this going to keep
going. So two, three, we don't have any
matches. And with that, SQL is done
executing the recursive query. All
right. So now the SQL going to say,
okay, did we process everything? Well,
no. We still have missing output. We
still have missing employees. That's why
we didn't fulfill the condition. And
we're going to run this again. So now in
the second iteration, it's going to join
as well again the city result with the
employees by matching the manager ID and
the employee ID. But this time it's
going to focus only on those two ids. So
the two and three. So SQL going to go
and find any matching where the major ID
equal to two or three. So it's going to
do it step by step. The first one is
not. The second one is as well not. The
third one is not because the manager ID
is one. But now to the employee number
four we have a match. So it's still
going to take this one and put it in the
output like this. And now in this
iteration what is the current level? It
is two but we add to it one that's why
we will get in the output three. And
then SQL keep going. So we have here the
employee number five and the manager ID
is equal to three. So what happens? SQL
takes it as well and put it in the
output as the result of the CTE and as
well the current level is two + one.
We're going to have as well three. So
with that SQL done joining the tables
and going to ask again did we process
all employees? Well yes it's true that
means we don't have to do any more
iterations because if you do any
iterations SQL will not find anything.
So for example if you go over here let
me just remove this and let's say we are
joining with the four and five. So what
can happen isql going to search in the
manager's ID for four and five and it
will not find anything. So that means we
will not be adding anything to the CTE.
That's why SQL stops. So we have a
complete results and we have now all the
data from the employees in the output
and this results going to be passed to
the main query. So this is why we have
done it like this and this is how
executed this recursive query. I would
like to visual for you what this means
the level or the structure of the
organization. So the hierarchy looks
like this. The level one the top manager
is Frank. So this is the level number
one. And then we go to the level number
two. So we have those two employees. So
we have Kevin. So this is the level
number one. And then we have two
employees Kevin and Mary at the level
two. So they work together and their
boss is Frank. So it's going to look
like this. And they are at the level
two. We have then Michael that directly
reports to who? To Kevin because here we
have the employee ID two and two. So we
have one employee here and as well Carol
is as well at the level three and she
reports to Mary and both Michael and
Carol are at the level three. So this is
what we mean with the level. It can help
us to identify which employee at which
level in the organization. If you have
like hierarchy in your data and you can
see in one table things are referencing
each others like here the manager ID is
actually the employee ID. So it's like
we are referencing those ID to each
others. This means there is hierarchy
and there is a structure in this table
and you can use the recursive city in
order to build those levels and to
navigate as well through the hierarchy.
All right. So that's all for the
recursive city and with that we have
covered all the different types of
cities that we have in
SQL. So now let's have a quick recap. So
we have learned that the CTE the common
table expression is a temporary named
result like a virtual table that could
be used from different places in the
query and we have a lot of advantages
for the CTE. The main one is it breaks
the complexity of query into small
multiple pieces which makes our query
much easier to read and as well to
understand. So it improves readability.
Another advantage of the city is that
those small multiple pieces they are
really easy to manage and to develop. So
those pieces are like self-contained
which makes our queries more modular. So
it introduces modularity inside our
queries. And we also learned that the
CTE help us to reduce the redundancy
inside our queries where it makes the
result of one query usable in multiple
places inside our query. So it makes our
code smaller and reduce redundancy. And
one more advantage of the city is that
it help us to do looping and iterating
in SQL by using the recursive CTE. And
we have understood as well that we can
treat the CTE result as any other
physical table inside our database. So
we can treat it and handle it like any
other tables. Only one exception that
this table lives only in one query. So
we cannot query the CTE from an external
query. Now we have learned that the
result of the CTE could be used from the
main query. This is the classical one.
But not only we can use it in the main
query but also we can use it in another
CTE query which leads to having nested
cities. And of course we have learned as
well we can use the result of the CTE
within itself which makes the CTE
recursive and allows for looping and
iterating. And I can only keep
recommending to not use more than five
CTEs in one query. Otherwise you're
going to get the exact opposite and
benefits from cdes where your code going
to be really hard to understand and to
read and even to extend. Okay my friends
with that we have covered this amazing
and very important technique in SQL the
common table expressions the city. Now
in the next step we're going to talk
about a new type of objects that you can
use in databases. We don't have only
tables we have as well views. And views
are amazing in order to give you dynamic
and flexibility in your project. So
let's talk about
views. Now a view is not like a query
that we can use in SQL. It is an object
that we can find in the database. So
before we jump immediately to the view,
I would like to give you the big
picture, the whole structure of the
database. So let's go. We have like
hierarchy structure and the highest
level of this hierarchy is the SQL
server. The SQL server manages multiple
databases. It's like the control center
that keep everything running and
accessible. Now inside the SQL server,
we have multiple databases. So a
database is collection of informations
that are stored in structured way. It's
where all your data is kept and
organized in different tables and
objects. And each database is separated
from others and it has its own data. Now
inside each database we can find
multiple schemas. A schema is like a
logical way on how you group up related
objects like tables and views together
within a database. Like for example, if
you have a database called sales, we can
group up different tables about the
orders underneath the schema orders. And
maybe we have like multiple views and
tables about the customers where we can
put it in the schema customers. So if
you find like multiple tables and views
that are describing the same object, the
same topic, we put them all together
underneath one schema. So again, a
database could be like the sales
database and the HR database. They are
completely different types of data. And
underneath the sales, we can have like
different sections. We have the sections
about the orders and sections about the
customers. And now moving on, what we
can find inside the schema, we can find
tables. A table is where actually your
data is stored. It contains multiple
columns and rows. So it is where the
data physically lives. And now inside
the schemas, we have another type of
object. We call it view. And of course
in this section, we are focusing on the
views. So a view is like a virtual table
that has a structure and everything but
inside it we don't have any data. So the
view does not store any data and in
order to see the data we have to execute
the query behind the view and only after
that we're going to see some data but it
is not like the tables it doesn't store
the data permanently. Now inside the
tables we can define multiple stuff like
columns and as well keys and the same
thing for the views. Inside the views we
can define multiple columns and one last
level for each column we have like a
name and a data type. So as you can see
the databases are really organized and
we have like hierarchy where the top
node is the SQL server and the lowest
node is the columns and rows. So this is
what we call the database structure. Now
in order for you to build and manage
this structure we have set of commands
we call it DDL the shortcut of data
definition language. So the detail is a
set of commands that allow us to define
and manage the structure of the
database. So we have commands like
create where it help us to create
databases, schemas, tables, views.
Another command called alter. Of course
after you create something you would
like maybe later to do changes and
updates and of course we have the drop
in order to remove any database object
like dropping a schema, dropping a
database, tables, views. So as you can
see the DDL commands can help us to
manage the database structure. So from
this picture we have understood that we
can create views inside schemas in the
database. So now if you check the client
and the object explorer you can find the
exact hierarchy. So it start with the
SQL server. This is our local server
that's run at our machine and then we
can find inside it multiple databases
and one of them is our sales DB that you
have installed together with other
database like the adventure works. So
now if you go to the sales DB over here
you can go and drill to the next level
and now we can find here a lot of
objects and one of them that you know we
have tables and views and now you might
say okay but between the database and
tables we have schemas so where are the
schemas well actually if you go inside
the tables you're going to find our
tables customers employees and so on but
before it we have a name called sales
doc customers and you can find it
everywhere sales doc customers sales do
employees and so on the sales is the
schema that bring all those tables
together underneath one logical schema.
So we have a database called sales DB.
We have a schema called sales and we
have a table called customers. And now
if you would like to see all the schemas
inside this database, what you can do?
You can go to the securities over here
and then here we have like a folder
called schemas. If you go over there,
you will find the list of all schemas
that we have in this database. You might
say, but we didn't create all those
stuff. If we have only the sales that we
know. Well, as you create a database in
SQL server, you will get a lot of other
system default schemas that the server
can create. One of them is the
information schema where it holds a lot
of views about the catalog and the
metadata where you can find the list of
columns, tables, views and so on. So
here we have only one schema that we
have created for the user. It is the
sales. So let's go back. Now if you go
inside one of those tables you will find
here multiple stuff like we have
columns, keys, constraints and so on.
And if you go to the columns you will
end up at the lowest level of the
hierarchy. And here we have the columns
like the customer ID and we have some
extra informations like the data type
length and so on. So this is the
structure and the hierarchy of
databases.
Now I would like you to understand a
fundamental concept on the database in
order to understand the views the
three-level architecture of the
database. This architecture can describe
the different levels of data
abstractions in a database. So let's see
what this means. So the architecture is
divided into three levels. The first
level is the physical level. Then we
have the logical level and the third one
is the view level. Now let's understand
each level what it means. So now the
physical level it is the lowest level of
the database where the actual data is
stored in a physical storage and usually
who has access to this layer are the
database administrators because they are
the experts and they have to manage the
access and the security of this layer
because they are the expert that have to
manage a lot of stuff like optimizing
the performance making sure that
everything is secure and managing the
backup and recovery and to do all the
configurations and many other tasks. So
at the physical layer we have to deal
with a lot of stuff like the data files,
partitions, logs, cataloges, blocks and
caches and many other stuff that each
database needs in order to store your
data. So as you can see this layer is
very complicated and you need to be
really an expert of databases in order
to be able to manage all those stuff. So
we call this layer a physical layer or
sometimes we call it an internal layer.
So now let's move to the next level. we
have the logical level. So the logical
layer it is less complicated than the
physical layer. Here at this level you
have to deal on how to organize your
data and normally we have here like an
application developer or we have like
data engineers that access the logical
level in order to define the structure
of your data. So those developers can
focus on how to structure your data
rather than how the data is exactly
storing the data physically at the
storage. So they don't have to deal with
all those details. they leave it for the
database administrator and they can
focus only on how to structure the data.
That's why we need for this kind of role
an abstraction level for them which is
the logical level. So now what actually
the developers are doing at this level?
Well, they are like creating tables and
defining the relationships between those
tables or they can go and define views.
they can create indexes on the tables in
order to optimize the performance of the
tables or maybe they are creating stored
procedures and functions and some other
codes in order to manage those tables.
So as you can see they are building the
data model they are structuring your
data but they don't care at all where
are those data stored physically in the
database. So as you can see here things
are less complicated than the physical
layer and it is perfect abstraction for
developers to build projects. So we call
this the logical layer or sometimes we
call it the conceptual layer. Okay. So
now moving on to another level of
abstraction. We have the view level. So
the view level is the highest level of
abstraction in the database and it is
what the end users and applications can
access and can see. So for example, you
could have like one view for business
analyst. So you prepare and customize a
views that are suitable only for the
business analyst and you might say you
know what let's prepare another set of
views that are suitable for data
visualizations and reporting like you
can go and connect for example a PowerBI
in order to create dashboards. So they
are fully customized and prepared views
in order to be connected with the
PowerBI reports and you can keep doing
that by creating multiple set of views
that are suitable for specific purpose
and use case. So as you can see at this
level we are exposing our data for
multiple users and multiple
applications. So now the question is
what do we have to deal at the view
level? Well, you have their only views
that holds only the relevant
informations for the use case or users.
So the users at this level have only
views. They don't have to deal with the
tables, indexes, store procedures, any
files, logs, partitions or anything.
This is the highest level of abstraction
because the focus of this layer is to
make it friendly for the end users and
easy to consume. So we call this layer
the view layer or sometimes we call it
an external layer. So this is the
three-level architecture of the
databases or we call it the three
abstraction levels of the database. So
the physical layer has the highest
complexity, the lowest abstraction and
the view layer has the highest
abstraction. So this is one more reason
why the views are very important concept
in SQL
[Music]
databases. Okay. So with that we have
enough fundamentals in order to start
talking about the views. So the question
is what are views? A view is a virtual
table in SQL that is based on the result
of a query without actually storing the
data in the database. So in short this
means views are stored or persisted SQL
query in the database. So let's
understand what this exactly means. Now
so far what you have learned we have
like database table and all what you
have done we create a select query in
order to retrieve the data from this
table. So once we execute our query we
will get the result back. Now if you are
talking about views they have as well
like the structure of the table but
without any data inside it. And for each
view there is like a query attached to
it. So there is no data but we have like
a query in order to get data. We call
the normal table as a physical table and
the view we call it a virtual table. So
now how exactly we're going to get the
data. So now if you go and write query
by selecting data from the view not from
the table from the view what going to
happen SQL going to go and trigger the
queue that is attached to the view and
this query is responsible to query the
physical table and then the result going
to fill the structure of the view and we
will get back of course the results. So
we are directly querying a view but
actually we are indirectly querying a
physical table. So the view is like
between us and the data. So that means
my real data is stored inside the
database tables and the views are like
an abstraction layer between me and my
real data. And of course the data will
not be stored inside the view. Each time
I'm querying the view what's going to
happen the SQL query behind the view
going to be executed again. So it's
going to go and retrieve the data and
get it back to the view and then I will
see it in the output. So this is what we
mean with SQL
view. So now let's have a quick
comparison between tables and views.
Tables stores the actual data physically
at a database. So the tables where the
data is persisted with in the other hand
the views they are virtual tables and
they do not store any data inside the
database but they present the data from
the underlying tables. So that means
views don't persist any data physically.
Now the tables are hard to maintain and
as well hard to change. So it needs a
lot of efforts in order to do any change
like adding columns and moving columns
always requires a lot of efforts for the
migration especially if you have large
tables. But in the other hand the views
are way easier to maintain and very
flexible to change. All what you have to
do is only to change the query of the
view. So that means you can very quickly
change stuff in the views compared to
the tables. But if you are talking about
performance, tables are faster than
views. For example, if you go and do a
simple select on the table, you will get
the data back as soon as the database
fetches the data. But if you are
selecting something from the view, it is
actually two queries. The query that
comes from the user and as well the
second query is the view query. and the
query of the view could be very
complicated in order to extract the data
from the underlying table. So selecting
something from the view is always slower
than selecting something from a table.
Now if you have a table you can read
from the table and as well you can write
to a table but the views are read only
as the name says it is only a view. You
cannot go and write something to the
database using the view. Okay. So those
are the big differences between views
and tables.
All right. So with that we have a clear
understanding what are views. But now
you might ask me why do we need views?
That's why now what we're going to do
we're going to deep dive into multiple
scenarios and use cases that you might
encounter in your SQL projects. So let's
start with the first use case. The first
use case and the core reason why we use
views in our data projects is to store
central logic from a complex query in
the database so that everyone can access
it and with that we improve reusability
between multiple queries and we reduce
as well the complexity of the overall
projects. So let's understand what this
means. So now in our project we have
like two tables in the database orders
and customers and we have learned
previously that if we have like a
complex query we can go and use the
city. So for example in our city we are
joining tables and doing some
aggregations using the sum and the city
going to store the data in an
intermediate results and then we have
the main query. For example we are doing
the step two where we are ranking the
data. So the whole thing is in one query
and let's say that a financial analyst
was doing this type of analyszis. Now
what could happen is that you might have
another user for example a budget
analyst where he is doing exactly the
same first step. So he has as well a
city query where first the data are
joined and then aggregated using the
sum. But the last step in the main query
he's not doing ranking he's just doing
like max and min. And not only that, we
have a third user, the risk analyst,
where as well doing the same initial
step using the CTE, joining the tables
and doing the summarization. But here
the risk analyst in this scenario, he's
just comparing the data at the last step
in the main query. So now if you sit
back and look to this, you can see all
those three data workers, all of them
are doing the same first step. So all of
them are doing the same CTE. They are
joining the data and then doing
summarization. And of course this is a
complete waste of time that each one of
them has to create first the city from
the scratch in order to do some
analyszis. So it is complete redundancy
and makes no sense. So this is exactly
the disadvantage of only using cities in
the projects. Now what we can do instead
of that those three data workers going
to decide to say you know what let's put
the first step as view in the database.
So instead of using CTE each time we're
going to take this script and put it in
the database. So we have now a central
logic that is stored in the database
where everyone can use it. So we have
this query this logic only once and
everyone can benefit from it. So now the
financial analyst instead of going
directly to the physical tables they can
go to the view. So thus means she needs
only to write one script the rank
script. Same thing goes for the budget
analyst. he has only to write the query
for the max and min and as well for the
risk analyst he just need to compare the
data. So as you can see all those
queries are reduced and they can only
focus on the analyzes. So this is
exactly the magic of views in data
analytics. This logic this knowledge can
be centralized in the database and this
is way faster and better than having
this logic written each time someone
want to do any analyzes. So this is why
we need views in data projects.
So now if you compare views with CTE,
the CTE are used in order to reduce the
redundancy within one single query. So
it improves the reusability within one
query. Where in the other hand in the
views we are reducing the redundancies
from multiple queries. So we are
reducing the complexity of the whole
project. So the views are improving the
reusability in multiple queries. Now
think about it like this. We use views
in order to persist a logic in the
database. So the logic is so important
that we want to persist it in the
database. It's like in the tables we
persist data but with the views we are
persisting logic. But in the other hand
in the CTE the logic is not persisted.
It is temporary and going to be
calculated only on the fly within the
scope of one query. So this logic is
important only in this scenario and it
is not important for any other queries.
That's why it makes no sense to persist
it using the views. So you have to
decide is this logic is very important
then take it away from the city and put
it in the view. But if you think you
know what this logic is not really
important and only important in this one
query then stay with the city because
creating views always needs some extra
steps in order to maintain the view. You
have to create the view. You have to
drop the view if you don't need it. But
the CTE, there is almost no maintenance
for it. The database going to do
automatically the cleanup once the query
is done. So there is no extra activity
to drop a city or something. That's why
CTE is easier to use than views. So
those are the big difference between the
views and
cities. Okay. So now let's check quickly
the syntax of a view. So now we have a
query like select from where. So this is
a query a simple select statement. But
now in order to create a view an object
in database we have to go and use a DDL
command create. So we're going to say
create view cuz we want to create a view
then the name of the view and then it's
like the CTE we say as and then double
parenthesis. So as you can see it's very
simple and we call this a DDL command
where we are telling the database go and
create a view and the logic of the view
comes from this query. So it's very
simple. This is how you can create views
in database. Okay. So now let's have the
following task and it says find the
running total of sales for each month.
I'm going to start this task by solving
it using the CTE. So first I'm going to
go and do few aggregations on the top of
the month. So let's go and select. So
now what do we need? We need the order
dates but we need it as a month. I'm
going to go and use the date truncate
like this and say okay I would like to
have the date as the granularity of
month. So let's go and call it order
month. And now after that we're going to
do a few aggregations like for example
let's go and get the sum of sales and
we're going to call it total sales. And
that's it for the start. So now let's go
and call it from the table sales orders
and group by and we are grouping up by
by the month. So something like this.
Let's go and execute it. And now for
this we get for each month the total
sales. And now the next step that we
have to go and calculate the running
total for the sales. This is of course
not the running total. So that means
either we can go and use subqueries. So
this means this is our first step and we
need a second step. So either use
queries or cities. I will go with the
city over here. So I'm going to say with
city and
monthly summary and we're going to
define it like this. And now what we're
going to do, we're going to go and
define the main query. So the main query
going to be simple. So select and let's
go and get the order month. And now we
have to build the running total. So
we're going to go and use the window
function. So sum total sales. And then
we're going to say over we don't have to
partition the data. We will just sort it
by the order
month and we can leave it ascending. So
this is the running
total and we have to go and select of
course our CTE from here. So let's go
and execute it and with that we are
getting the running total. Of course we
can go and add the total sales in the
output in order to understand the
results. So here in the output we are
just building accumulative sales. So for
this scope everything is fine. and we
are using the CTE. But now imagine that
this logic is important for multiple
queries. So it's really nice to have
such a report where we are aggregating
the data at the level of the month and
this could be used from different users
and different queries. So now we say how
about to put this logic in one view so
that everyone can access it and we don't
have to repeat the same aggregations
over and over. And now before we put it
in view, someone comes and say how about
to add one more aggregation so that not
only the total sales we can add. So now
before we put it as view maybe some
other user says you know what we would
like to have one more aggregation not
only the total sales let's make the
scope a little bit bigger so that
everyone can believe it. So for example
we can go over here and say you know
what let's go and add the total number
of orders. So we can go over here and
say counts and let's get the order ID
and say this is the total orders or
maybe some other says let's get the
quantities as well. So we can go and
summarize the quantity like this and we
call it total
quantities. So with that we are like
doing a lot of aggregations on the month
level. Let's go and execute only the
CTE. So now we have really nice report
that is based on the months and can be
used from many different queries. So now
what we're going to do, we're going to
take this and put it in a view. Let's go
and select only this logic and create a
new query. And now what we're going to
do, we're going to put our query here
and we have to create now the DDL in
order to create a view. So it's going to
be like this. Create view. Let's give it
the name maybe starts with the V
underscore and this going to be the
monthly summary. So this is the name of
the view and as then we put everything
in parenthesis. It's like you are
building a CTE. So we have here our
logic and here is our DDL query in order
to create the view. So now let's go and
execute it. Now as you can see in the
output it says only that the command is
completed because this is not a select
query. This is a DDL command. So the SQL
going to tell you okay either I created
it successfully or not. So now the
question is where do I find now my view?
Well, if you go to the object explorer,
you can see over here underneath our
database sales DB, we have here
something called tables where we are
used to query those tables. But beneath
it, we have as well our views. So if you
check the views and expand it, now we
are not seeing M view because we just
created the view here. So go over here
and refresh. And once you do that, you
will see the newly created view. So this
is the one that we just created. So now
what we can do, we can go and create a
new query and let's go and just query
the view. So select star from so v month
monthly summary. Let's go and execute
it. And now as you can see we are
getting now the result of the view and
I'm accessing now this logic from
completely external query. So now I can
think about the view as any other table
that we have in the database. And again
the big differences between the views
and the tables. The tables has data has
actual data and everything there is
persisted but the view is just an
abstraction for me and behind it there
is like a query that goes to the table
and query the tables in order to present
the results. But for me I don't care
about all those details. I can go
immediately to the query over here and
start querying. So now in order to
create the total running sales I don't
have to create the CTE and sub queries.
I just go and get for example our main
query. Let's go back over here. So now
instead of using the CTE I can go
directly and access the view. So as you
can see now my query is very simple. I'm
doing immediately the step two without
having to prepare the data first. So if
I go and execute it I will get exact
results. And now if you compare the
query on top of the view like this with
the city query you can see that the CTE
has more steps and it is like little bit
more complicated than the query on top
of the view and this is exactly the
benefit of the view. We reduce the
complexity and it is very easy to
consume from the point of view of users.
So this is how you can put your logic in
central place using views and with that
we have learned how we create a view.
Now one more thing about the schemas. If
you check our tables over here, they
have all one schema. So we have sales
dot customers, sales do employees,
orders and so on. Our new view has the
schema of DBO. If you create any object
whether it's table or view and you don't
specify a schema in a default schema
called DBO. And now let's go back to our
DDL scripts. So as you can see over
here, we didn't specify any schema. We
just said okay, this is the view name.
And now in order to put our view in the
correct schema we don't want it to be in
the defaults. You have to go and specify
the schema name in the DDL. And now in
order to do that we go to the name of
the view and we write the schema name
and then separated with a dot. So the
first one is the schema name and the
second one is the view name. So now
let's go and execute it. Now if you
check over here you don't see anything
new. But if you refresh you will find
another view in the correct schema. So
we have sales dot vmon monthly summary
and this is exactly what we want. So
this is how you can assign a view or
even a table to the correct schema if
you don't want to use the default one
the view. All right. So now the next
step is that you say you know what I
would like to clean up. I don't need
those two views in my database. So how
to delete a view? We can go and use the
command drop. It is very simple. If you
go and create a new query and you say
drop and then you say what you want to
drop. you want to drop a view and then
you have to specify the name and schema
of the view. But now since it is the
default schema DBU, I don't have to
write it down. So we can start
immediately with the view name. So V
monthly summary. So that's it. It's very
simple. So now we go and execute it. It
says it's completed but as you can see
nothing has changed. We go and refresh.
And now we can see that the database did
remove the view with the schema DBU. So
it's very simple. This is how you can
drop a view in SQL. Okay. So now to the
next step. Let's go back to our DDL of
creating the view sales monthly summary.
And now you say you know what I would
like to change the logic inside the
view. So how we can update this content?
How I can update my query? If you say
let's go and for example delete this
column. I need only three columns. So
and you go execute it. The database say
I cannot do it for you because we have
already such a view. So SQL will not go
and replace stuff going to say no we
have the same name and I cannot do
anything for it. So how we can update
the view? Well in other databases like
ocris for example it's very simple. You
can go over here and say create or
replace view. So it's like you are
telling the database create this view or
if it already exists then replace it and
you will not get error in the postcress.
But in the SQL server it is little bit
more complicated. we don't have this
command. So here you have two ways.
Either you go over here and say you know
what let's first drop the view. So you
go with the same name over
here and then what you're going to do
you're going to go and mark the drop
view. So if you execute it like this the
view going to be dropped and then we
recreate the view like this. So what we
have done we destroy the view and then
we recreate it using the new logic. Or
you say you know what I would like to
have everything in one go like I don't
want to do it in two steps. I would like
to have everything in one command and
for that you have to use in SQL server
the TSQL the transacts SQL it is like an
extension for SQL only in SQL server
well it's like programming where you can
go and add variables or you can all go
and add checks we will not do a deep
dive in this language but I would like
to show you how to do it for the views
so just follow me with that I'm going to
go and replace the whole thing and then
we're going to say if and now we are
checking the system catalog if the
object ID
And now we go and specify the view name.
So let's go and copy the whole thing
with the schema as well. And then we're
going to say for SQL this is a view. So
if this object exists so we are saying
is not null. So that means it exist in
the catalog then what SQL should do?
Should drop this view. So we're going to
say drop view and it's like we have done
it first and then semicolon and then we
say for scale go and with that we are
saying for SQL the tscale is done. So
the logic is done and after that we have
the DDL for our view. So again what we
are doing we are checking before
creating the view whether the view
exist. If it exist then we are telling
the scale go and drop it and if it
doesn't exist that means we haven't
created this view yet. it is completely
brand new view then this step going to
be skipped so that there is nothing to
drop. So now if you go and execute the
whole thing it will work and of course
if you go and refresh over here you
still see the view. So SQL did destroy
the table first and then recreated. So
if you execute it again. So this is how
you replace your logic in view in SQL
server. And with that we have learned
all possible scenarios. How to create a
view, how to drop a view and how to
update the logic of a
view. Now back to our database
architecture and let's understand how
the database executes views. So now
let's say that the data engineer is
creating view called top end. So the
query going to be sent to the database
engine and once the database engine
understand this is a view this is not a
table. So now the database engine going
to go to the disk storage and to the
catalog and it will stores not only the
metadata about the view also the SQL
that is responsible for the view. So
it's going to take the SQL statements
that you have defined in the create view
and place it as well in the catalog. So
if you compare to the tables we have in
tables only metadata but in the views we
have both the metadata and as well the
query of the view and as well you can
see that the database engine will not
create a table in the user's data. So
there is nowhere data stored inside the
disk or the cache. So the actual data
the physical data will not be stored
anywhere. We are storing only metadata
and the query inside the system catalog.
So now we tell our data analyst okay we
have a new view and the data analyst can
go and write a query in order to
retrieve the data from the view. So he
going to say and say select from the
view and execute it. The database engine
going to take it and understand okay now
we are talking about view. So the
database first has to retrieve not the
data going to retrieve the query from
the catalog in order to understand what
do we have now to execute. Then the
database going to execute the query of
the view first and the data for this
query comes from a physical table called
orders. So now the database engine is
querying the order to retrieve the data
so that we have a data for the end user
and then it's going to be executed and
the result going to be sent back to the
data analyst. So as you can see there is
like two queries. The SQL engine first
has to execute the query from the view
and only after that the database engine
can execute the query that comes from
the user. So actually the data comes
always from a physical table but we are
not providing the data analyst an access
to the table. We are just providing an
access to the view. So this can happen
each time an end user selecting data
from the view. Always the database
engine going to grab the query from the
catalog, execute it first in order to
get the data and then execute what the
end user wants. And now if the data
engineer says no, let's go and drop the
view. So she writes a query in order to
drop the view. And the database engine
going to go to the system catalog and
delete both the metadata and the query.
So as you can see, if you are dropping a
view, you are not losing the actual
data. So there will be no user data lost
at all. So don't worry about it. What
you are losing is only the query and the
metadata about your view. It's only if
you drop a physical table like the
orders, you will lose your data. So
dropping views is not that bad like
dropping a database table. So this is
how the database works with the views
behind the scenes.
Now moving on to the second scenario to
the next use case of using views in
projects is that we use views in order
to hide complexity and to improve
abstraction. In many scenarios we work
with a very large and complex databases
and we can use views in order to reduce
the complexity and make things easier
for the users. So let's understand what
this means. Now I'm going to explain for
you a scenario that happens almost in
each project. Like if you get an access
to a database where you want to do
analyzes, you will be in scenario and
this can happen a lot where you're going
to find a large database where the
tables are very complex to understand.
They have a lot of columns. They have
like technical and cryptical names and
how tables are connected to each others
and relationship between them. It's
almost impossible to understand. then
you have to be deeply involved with the
data models with documentations and with
experts until you understand how to
query this database. So if you are not a
developer and from end user perspective
it can be nightmare where you are trying
to do multiple joins in order to make
simple analyzes and of course from the
database perspective this data model is
good enough for one application but if
you are opening your database for
multiple data analyszis projects this
can be a nightmare because you have to
go and explain for each user how to
query the data. So what we usually do
instead of giving a direct access to
such technical and hard to understand
data model we go as developers creating
multiple views since we are the expert
of the data model and these new views
going to be an abstraction of the
complexity that I have in my database
and we have to make sure that those
views are providing objects that are
friendly. So they have like a full
English name that makes sense and as
well the columns are friendly and we try
to not offer a lot of views so the user
don't have to do all the joins. So we
provide like few views that are friendly
and has a lot of informations that the
users needs for the analyzes. So with
that the users can have an access to
something more friendly and easy to
consume and then they can write simple
queries in order to do analyzes on top
of these friendly views. And this is
what we can give a name like we are
providing a data product from my complex
physical database. So here again how
important are the views to provide an
abstraction and easy to consume objects
for the users and with that I can hide
all my complexity and the script of the
view going to be developed from the
experts and only once so that the users
don't have to understand or to write
these complex SQL joins and with that
you can make your data projects way
easier than before. So this is another
important use case for the views where
we can use it in order to provide
abstraction and as well easy and
friendly objects for the end users.
Okay. So now let's have the following
task and it says provide view that
combines details from orders, products,
customers and employees. So now instead
of having all those tables from our
database, we have to provide one
combined view that has everything well
almost everything. So now let's see how
we can create such a view. So let's
start first by the table orders. I'm
going to go and
select first star from sales orders and
let's go and execute it. This is the
central table that connects everything.
You can see here we have the order ID,
product ID, sales, customers and so on.
So it is a great start point. So now
we're going to go and be picky about the
columns. I would not show all the
columns but I would say let's go and
show for example the order ID. This is
essential. It's nice to have a unique
identifier. Now the product ID, I will
not show it but I will just list it over
here. The same for the customer ID,
saleserson ID. Those stuff I would like
to replace later. So I will just make it
as comment so I don't forget about it
because it makes no sense to show the
product ID and customer ids and so on.
We would like to show the details about
each object because instead of having
the product ID, I would like to show for
example the product name itself and some
other informations from the table
products. And with that we are reducing
the complexity. So now what else we can
get from the table orders? We can go and
get the order date. I will put it here.
And maybe we can go and get stuff like
sales and
quantity. So like this. Of course, we
can go and put all the columns. But for
now, I will go with those informations.
Now, it's important since we're going to
have a lot of tables. Let's go and make
sure we are using aliases. So, now we're
going to have the O for each of those
columns. All right. Fine. So, now we
have four details from the table orders.
Now, what is next? We have the product
ID. So, let's go and get the
informations from the products. What
we're going to do, we're going to use a
left join just to make sure to not miss
any order. If you go with the inner
join, you might miss some orders. So I
will not do that. So let's join it with
the products like this.
And so now we have to go and join the
tables. So we can use the keys product
ID equal the order product ID. All
right. So now the question is which
informations we want to show for the
users. Let's go to the table orders. So
we have the product and category and the
price. I would say let's go and get the
product and category. That's enough. So
now instead of the ID I'm going to have
it like this. So it's going to be the
product and the
category. Now let's go and test it. I'm
going to execute it. Now as you can see
we don't have a product ID. We have the
product name which is more friendly. So
we have now those two columns from the
orders and those two from the products
and the last two as well from the
orders. So it looks really nice and
friendly and with that the user don't
need extra table called products. We
have everything in one. Now let's go and
do the same for the customers. So let's
go
and do the same thing. So let's join
sales customers see and as well join
them using the key customer ID equal to
the customer ID. Now we have to go and
grab a few columns from the customers.
Let's go and check. So we have a first
name, last name and country and score. I
would say I would go with the names and
the countries but instead of having
first name and last name I'm going to
put everything in one. So we have to go
and concatenate the informations. So
we're going to get the first
name then plus then empty between the
first name and the last name and then
the last name like
this. Now we will not call it a name.
We're going to go and call it the
customer name because later we're going
to have as well an employee name. All
right. So next we want to get the
country and we have to say this is the
country from the customers. So we're
going to call it customer country and
that's it. Let's go and execute it. Now
we can see we have again our orders
products and now we have the
informations from that customer. But
here we have issue that we have some
nulls and that's because there is no
last name. So what we're going to do,
we're going to go and handle the nulls
for the last name and as well for the
first name. So we're going to use the
kowalis. If the last name is null then
make an empty string and the same thing
for the first name. So first name. All
right. So now let's go and execute it.
So with that we are getting as well the
first name if the last name is missing
or if the first name is missing we can
get the last name. So looks good. So it
looks good with that. We have the
customer's details. The last thing we
have to go and get the employees. So the
employee here is called salesperson ID
which we can connect it directly to the
table employees. So if you go to the
employees over here, which columns do we
need? We have the first name, last name,
department and so on. I would say let's
go get the names and the departments. So
first let's go and join it. So lift join
sales
employees and we're going to join it
using the employee ID. and we're going
to join it with the sales person ID that
comes from the order table. So now
instead of the person ID we're going to
have as well the same thing. So I will
just go and copy paste this. So instead
of the alias we're going to have E and
as well E over here and we're going to
call it sales name and as well what we
going to have we're going to have the
department. So
department and that's it. Let's go and
execute it. So now we have a lot of
informations in our view. So we have the
first columns from the orders then from
the products and here we have from
customers and those two from the
employees and the last two again from
the orders. So that we have combined now
all the relevant informations from
multiple tables in our database in only
one view. This result is relative big
but still we have all the informations
in one and it is more friendly for the
users in order to consume our data
instead of going and joining like all
those four tables together. So now the
next step we're going to put the result
of this query in view in our database so
that our end users can start consuming
it. So how we going to do it? This is
our combined query and now we're going
to write the DDL for it. So create view
and now we're going to give it the name
order details and then as and we're
going to put the whole thing in two
parenthesis. So at the start and at the
end and of course don't forget the
schema. So our schema is sales sales dot
then we have the view name just in order
to have it in the correct schema and not
in dbo. So everything is ready. Let's go
ahead and execute it. So now let's go
and check our database. So if you go and
refresh, you will find our second view
order details. So now let's go and test
it. We're going to say select star
from sales v order details. Let's go and
execute it. And with that we are getting
now a combined view that are showing all
important informations from the
database. So this is what the users can
see. And with that the users don't care
about how many tables do we have in the
tables and how to join all those tables.
We have only one view and we can start
working on it. This is a very common use
case for the
views. Okay. Moving on to the next
scenario to the next use case. We use
SQL views in order to implement security
and to protect our data in the database.
In many scenarios, we have sensitive
informations in our data and we cannot
go and share it with everyone. So one of
the best practices is to create views in
order to protect your data before
sharing it with the users. So let's
understand what this means. So now let's
understand first the scenario without
views only tables. So now let's say that
you have the table orders four columns
and three rows and then you have like
for example a manager that has an access
directly to the database and start
writing some queries in order to
retrieve data. But in your project you
have multiple people that has an access
to your database like for example a data
analyst and as well she is writing a
script in order to retrieve data from
the orders and as well you have maybe a
students that has an access to your
database and querying the data like any
other role like a manager and data
analyst. So as you can see you have now
different rules in your project and all
of them having the same rights by
accessing directly your table. So a
manager or data analyst or a student
they are seeing the whole table all rows
and all columns. And of course in the
real projects this is a big problem.
Sometimes the data are sensitive and you
cannot give an access for everyone. And
of course if you are using only tables
this going to be a nightmare because you
can go and create multiple tables but
it's going to be really hard to make all
those tables in sync. But instead of
that we have views. So what you can do
you can go and remove all accesses to
the physical table but instead you can
go and create multiple views for each
role. For example you can go and create
a view called orders managers and maybe
you can give all the data and all the
columns because the managers are allowed
to see let's say sensitive data but
still it's nice to create a view maybe
you change your mind later and you go
and remove something. Now let's say that
for the data analyst you want to offer
all the data but there is only one
column that is very sensitive. So what
you can do you can go and create another
view called orders analyst. So in the
view only three columns are available
ABC and then you give access to all data
analyst and with that you have protected
this sensitive information. So we call
this column level security. And now we
come to our poor students. And here we
create another view where we are not
only protecting the column D but also we
are protecting few rows like for example
the row number three because we want to
offer only few informations to the
students. So we are protecting the
columns and as well the rows and for
that we can create another dedicated
view called for example orders students
and we can offer it to the students and
with that we are doing column level
security and as well row level security.
So we are offering multiple views very
easily without having to worry how to
load the data from one table to another.
So creating those views are really easy
and provide us a perfect tool in order
to manage the security of our data. So
this is one very common use case of
using views in data projects. All right.
So now let's have the following task and
it says provide a view for EU sales team
that combines details from all tables
and excludes data related to the USA. So
the first part of the task is similar to
what we have already done but we cannot
offer all data for the user. So this
time we are providing a view that is
specifically created for a team the
sales team. So the first part we have
already done it where we are combining
all details in one view. But the problem
with the view that we have created that
it shows all data. But now the
requirement change we cannot show all
data. We have to go and exclude the USA
data from our details. So let's see how
we can do that. It's very simple. We're
going to go and grab the same query. We
will not repeat that. So we have as well
here joining tables and prepare
everything. But instead of showing all
data, what we're going to do, we're
going to go and filter the data based on
the customer country. So it's very
simple. At the ends we will have a work
clause where the C country is not equal
to
USA. So we have now a filter. Let's go
and execute it. And with that, as you
can see in the output, we are getting
the orders that are not from USA. And
with that we are protecting the data of
the USA and the EU sales teams can
access only their data. So it looks nice
and protected. And with that we are
doing now role level security. That
means we are hiding now all the orders
all the rows that are not allowed to be
seen and consumed from this group of
users. So now what is the next step? It
is very simple. We're going to go and
put everything in one view. So with that
we have the query ready and we can go
and create the new view. So we're going
to call it create view. Then we need the
schema and the name going to be almost
the same. So order details but EU. And
then we have to have as punch
parenthesis like this. So everything is
ready. Let's go and execute it. And now
we can go and refresh in order to see
our new view. If you still don't see it,
you can go to the views over here and
refresh as well to the folder. So with
that I can see we have our new view.
Now, of course, the next step we go and
test it. So, let's create a new query.
Select star
from sales and v order details EU. So,
let's test it. And with that, as you can
see, we are getting the combined view
only for the data that is relevant for
the EU sales team. So, I'm not seeing
here any USA records. So, with that, we
are providing view that protects few
rows like the orders from USA. So as you
can see views are really great in order
to provide security to our data whether
we are protecting the columns or the
rows. For example in our view we can say
not only I want to remove the USA orders
but let's say the department information
is sensitive information and I would
like to hide it from the view. So you
can just simply remove it from the
select and with that you are doing
column level security. So now I have two
options that I can provide to the users.
The first option doesn't has any like
role level security. It is the first
view the order details. We don't have
there any filters. So it's going to show
all the orders. So here we give access
only to people that are allowed to see
all data. And we have another option the
details with the EU. It doesn't show all
data. It shows only a subset that is
relevant for the EU team. So now it's
really easy to control the security of
my data using the views. And this is
very important use case for the
[Music]
views. Okay. Okay, so moving on to the
next use case for the views, we can use
it in order to have more dynamic and
flexibility in our projects. So let's
understand what this means. If you have
a table and you have multiple users
accessing this table, now what can
happen? you might change your mind about
the design and the data model of your
database where you can say you know what
instead of having one table I'm going to
go and split it into two tables or maybe
another decision you say you know what
I'm going to go and rename a table or in
another day you decide you know what
let's go and rename few columns or maybe
add a column remove column so you are
doing changes to your physical data
model and you are changing stuff in the
tables you know what's going to happen
all those users that are accessing the
tables going to scream because all of
them having a complex SQL queries and
your small changes at the tables are
breaking everything in their queries and
what this means this means escalations
and you don't have anymore the freedom
to change anything in your database
without talking before to 100 people
before doing any change. So we don't do
that instead of that we use views. So
what's going to happen? You create a
view and you tell the users, okay, take
this view and consume it and leave me
alone. And now you have again your
freedom to do any changes you want. So
you go to your tables and do splitting,
renaming and changing everything you
want as long as you are updating the
query between the table and the view to
make sure that the users are not
noticing any change. So for example, if
you go and split the table into two
tables, then you have to put in the view
a join or union in order to reconstruct
the same structure that the users are
used to. And if you would like to rename
something in your database, like instead
of ID, you are now calling it a key. All
what you have to do now is to go to the
query of the view and rename it back
from a key to an ID. So no one going to
notice that you are doing changes to the
physical tables. So using views and
offering it to users is a gamecher for
you because giving the users views kind
of gives you more freedom dynamic and
flexibility to change anything in your
data model and the tables without
getting any headache. So this is amazing
use case for the
views. Okay, moving on. We have a lot of
use cases for the views. They are just
amazing. So the next one is we can use
views in order to introduce a second
version of my data model in another
language. So we could offer multiple
languages to the users. Let's understand
what this means. So now we have the
following scenario. We have again our
table orders where the data is persisted
and everything in English and of course
what happens sometimes you have like
international team that are accessing
your data. So you have team in USA and
maybe you have team from Germany that as
well are end users that want to access
the data. Of course it depend on the
number of users that are using your
database. But if you have a lot of users
that come from Germany and as well from
India, it might make sense that you go
and translate your data and the table
structure into another language. So for
example, instead of giving access to the
table orders, we can create another view
called bishong. That's the order in
German. But not only you are giving a
new name for the object, you could go as
well and rename all the columns inside
the view. Then the German users going to
access the German view and it's going to
be for them easier to understand the
content of your database. The same thing
for the Indian team. And for the Indian
users, you can go and provide a view in
Hindi. I'm not sure whether I'm
pronouncing the word correct, but this
is the first word that I said in Hindi.
I don't promise that I'm going to learn
the Hindi language because it's enough
to learn Germany. So I'm trying as well
to write this word Adish. I hope it is
correct. And to be honest, it is really
interesting how you write this word in
Hindi. So now back to the topic. As you
can see now we are using like the views
in order to provide a translation for
our database by just giving a new name
for the views and as well for the
columns. So this is another nice use
case that I usually use as well in my
projects in order to provide multi-
languages for the data model that I have
and I can do that with the power of
views. Now we come to my favorite use
case for the views and that I personally
recommend in each project that we can
use views as a virtual data ms in a data
warehouse. So now why this is my
favorite? Because I'm specialist in data
warehouses and data leaks and this topic
is very important decision in each
project like this. So let's understand
what this means. So now a classical data
warehouse architecture based on the
approach of enmon is going to look like
this. We have multiple source systems
where our data are spreaded and now we
would like to go and extract all our
data from these multiple sources and put
it in one big database called data
warehouse. And there will be a lot of
operations on this central database like
the data going to be first cleaned and
then maybe integrated together and maybe
we are building there some historical
data. So we're going to be doing
multiple steps in order to prepare the
data for complex reporting and analyzes.
And what we usually do in the data
warehouse, we're going to store all
those informations as a physical table.
Now once we have built the data
warehouse, what's going to happen? We're
going to have multiple use cases that
would like to access the data warehouse
in order maybe to do some different
reporting. Now, it's going to be very
complex if we connect immediately like a
reporting engine like PowerBI directly
to the data warehouse. But instead of
this, we try to split the data warehouse
into multiple subsets like we can split
it after topic or domain or departments
and we call those subsets as data marts.
So a data mart is always specific for a
use case that's focus on one topic like
for example we could have a dedicated
mart for the sales and another data m
which is dedicated only for finance
topics but both of them comes from our
data warehouse. Then the last layer
going to be like for example the
reporting and dashboarding maybe you
have something like powerbi where you
are creating a dashboard one data m like
the sales or and as well maybe few stuff
from other marts. But now the big
question here in the data mart is how
should I store the data? Should I store
the data using tables or should I use
views? And now the best practice says if
you are building data marts then use
views. And we call this virtual data
marts. And there are many reasons why
using views at a data mart it's way
better than using tables. Like for
example, it is more dynamic and quicker
to change them cuz usually at the data
mart you are building a lot of business
logics and you want to have some
flexibility and speed and the
maintenance efforts is very simplified.
No need to build any ETLs or data loads
from the data warehouse to the data
parts and this makes the data warehouse
as a real single point of truth for your
data. And once you start copying data
from one layer to another layer, it's
going to be really hard to maintain and
chaotic and you have to have really
restrict monitoring and data quality. So
that's why using views you're going to
always reflect the status of the data
warehouse and this can help you of
course with the data consistency which
is a critical point in each data
warehouse project. So there are many
reasons why we build virtual data mart
and we go with the views in this layer.
So as you can see how the views are
playing a very important role in
building a data warehouse. So this is
another amazing and very important use
case of using views in your data
projects. All right friends, so now
let's have a quick recap about views. So
we have learned that views are a virtual
table that is based on the result of a
query without actually storing any data
in the database. So we use views in
order to presist a complex SQL logic and
query in the database. And we have
learned that in some scenarios views are
better than CTE because it improves the
reusability and reduce the complexity in
multiple queries which reduce the
complexity of the whole projects where
the CTE only improves the reusability in
one query. And we have learned that as
well the views in some scenarios are
better than tables. We have learned that
they are very flexible and easier to
maintain since they don't store any data
and it's really fast and easy to change
stuff in the view compared to the
tables. But as well we have learned that
the tables are faster than views. Now
there are like endless use cases for the
views. But from my experience in
projects I have choose for you the best
use cases for the views. The first use
case is if we find like a common
repeated logic in SQL queries, we can go
and store this logic in view in the
database so that the users don't have to
keep repeating the logic over and over.
So we use views in order to have a
central business logic. Another use case
is to hide the complexity of your
physical data model and to offer for the
users and high abstracted layer. So you
provide for the user something very
friendly and you hide all the complex
technical data model that you have in
the database because not everyone is
expert with your data model. One more
use case we can use views in order to
implement security and to protect our
sensitive data in the database. So we
can offer multiple views in order to
protect columns or rows in a table.
Another use case we have learned that we
can use views in order to have more
dynamic and flexibility for your
database where we offer the users a
table view and then you have the freedom
to change stuff at your physical data
model without affecting all users. And
another nice use case for the views we
can offer multiple languages from our
data model. And the last use case we
have learned how views play an important
role in a data warehouse system. So
views are amazing. All right my friends.
So with that we have learned everything
about this new objects the views in
databases. This is amazing for
flexibility and dynamic in your
projects. Now in the next one we're
going to learn how to create tables
based on query and we will learn about
the temporary tables. So let's
go. Okay. So now first let's have a look
again to the database structure. We have
learned that in each SQL server there
are multiple databases and in each
database there are multiple schemas. And
now inside each schema we can define
multiple objects like we can define
tables and views. And now we will be
focusing on the object table. And we
have learned as well we can use the
language DDL data definition language
which is a set of SQL commands in order
to define this database structure. So we
can use the SQL command create in order
to define a new table or alter in order
to update the structure or drop in order
to drop the whole table. So a table is
an object in the database structure and
we have learned as well there is three
levels of the database architecture and
we have understood that at the logical
level the middle one the conceptual
level we deal as application developer
or data engineer with the tables. So we
define tables and relationship between
them. So if you are an end user or a
business analyst it's going to be little
bit more hard to work with the tables.
You have to be a developer or a data
engineer. But working with tables is way
easier than working with the complexity
of the database at the physical level.
So you don't have to be a database
expert or administrator to work with
tables. So the difficulty here is like
in the middle. The abstraction is not
that low but as well not that high. So
now let's answer the question, what are
tables? A database table is a structured
collection of data. It's like a simple
grid or spreadsheet that you might find
in Excel. So it has different columns
like each column represent a field like
the ID, name, country and the table has
as well multiple rows and each row
represent a record or an entry of the
data. So for example if this table is
about the employees then each record
each row is one employee. Now the
intersect between the rows and columns
we call it a cell and a cell is a single
piece of data. Now the whole table going
to be stored physically in the database
as database files. So they are in the
database like multiple files that are
holding the informations about the table
and those files are stored physically in
that disk storage of the database. So
that means your data inside the tables
are not stored like a spreadsheet like
an Excel but they are stored in special
database files that usual developers and
end users don't have access to those
files. So tables again it's like an
abstraction and representation for the
actual data that are in the files. So
actually each time you are querying the
database table the database has to go to
those files and fetch the data for you.
All right. So this is what we mean with
database
tables. Okay. So now we have like
different types of tables in SQL. We
have tables that stays forever. We call
it permanent tables. So they stay as
long as you don't drop them. And you
have another type of tables they called
the temporary tables. And those tables
going to be deleted and dropped once the
session ends. So now we're going to
focus first on the first type, the
permanent tables. And there are two ways
on how to create them. The first way is
the classical way where you create table
from the scratch and then you go and
insert your data. So we call it create
insert and the other way called create
table as select. It's going to create as
well the table but based on SQL query.
So let's understand the differences
between
them. The create insert method is the
classical way on how we define and
create tables in SQL where first we have
to go and create the table and define
the structure and after that we insert
our data into the database table where
the other method the CTAs create table
as select. And this one going to create
a new table as well but this time based
on the result of SQL query. So let's
understand what this means. Okay. So now
to the first method create insert. So
here we have two steps. The first step
is we have a DDL statements where we use
the command create. So once we execute
the first step what's going to happen
the database engine going to go and
create for us an empty table. It is a
brand new table where we can hold our
data. So with that we have defined the
structure of our table but it's still an
empty table. So now in the next step we
have to go and insert our data inside
this new table. So our data can come
from multiple sources like a CSV file or
maybe completely from another database
where we are doing migration or maybe
you are inserting manually your data or
maybe it come from an application or you
are doing data migration from one
database to another. So at the end once
you execute insert what's going to
happen your data going to be inserted in
this new table. So in this method we
have like two steps. First we define the
structure of the table and the second
step we take care of inserting our data
inside the table. And now this new table
and your data going to be persisted
permanently. Now let's check the other
method the CTIS. Here it's only one step
where you define a query and once you
execute this query what going to happen
the database has to retrieve the data
from another table. So it might retrieve
data from our new table that we just
created using create insert. So once the
query is executed we will get a result.
So now what the database going to do
going to create a new brand table but
this time the definition and the data of
this new table it doesn't come from any
definition that we specify. it comes
from the result of the query. So
whatever structure that we have in the
results, it going to be reflected in our
new table. So again the definition and
the data that we see in this new table
comes one one to one from the result of
our query. So in this type we don't have
to define anything or to insert any
data. We are just writing a query and
the output of this query going to define
the table. But in this method as you can
see it always needs a database table in
order to execute the query. But the
create insert method we are creating
something from the scratch. So these are
the two different ways on how you create
tables in SQL and the differences
between
them. Okay. So now you might ask you
know what the CTAs are very similar to
the views. We have a query and the
output of this query going to be like an
object in the database. So what are the
differences between them? Let's check
this. Now let's say that in our database
we have a table that has three columns
A, B, C. And now what we can do, we can
go and create view based on a query. So
you create the DDL statement in order to
create the view in the database. And of
course the database going to go and
store the query in the database and it's
going to be empty. So there will be no
data because views does not store any
data and the query of the view will not
be yet executed. But now in the other
hand if you go and create a table using
CTIS. So here again we have a query
attached to the object to the table. So
here what happens the database has to
execute the query in order to understand
the structure and as well the data that
should be inserted inside the table. So
our SQL query going to be executed and
the result of the query going to be
inserted inside the table. So that means
this new table is storing already the
result of the query. So now this is the
first differences between the table and
view. As you create view the query will
not be executed and we don't have
anything about the result of the query
where in the CTIS we have already result
of the query stored inside the table and
everything is prepared. So now let's see
what's going to happen once the user
selects something from the view. So now
the database going to go for the first
time executing the query of the view in
order to fetch the data from the
original table and then presented as a
result for the user. But now in the
other hand if the user go and query the
table that is created from the CTIS. So
now what can happen? SQL will not
execute again the query of the CTIS
because the database already done that
and prepared everything. So that means
we are not querying anything from the
original table and the data can be
directly fetched from the new table. So
the user is going to get immediately the
result from our table that is created
from the CDIS. So here comes the second
difference between the tables and views.
The views are slower than CTIS and
that's because the database has here an
extra task. It must execute the query of
the view in order to get the data. But
in the CTIS the query going to be faster
than the view because we have already
executed everything and prepared it for
the user. So that's why tables from CTIS
are way faster than views. And now there
is another difference and perspective
about this which is from my point of
view is more important than the
performance. So now let's say that in
the next day we are doing data updates
on the original table like we are doing
updates on the column C and as well in
the column P. So now let's see what this
means for the user if they are using
views. So the user in the next day is
executing again the same query and again
here the database has to execute the
query of the view in order to fetch the
data from the original table. So that
means today in the views we are getting
different data than yesterday because we
have a new data and new updates and the
user in the result going to see as well
the new updates and the fresh data. So
the user is seeing exactly the status of
the data in the original tables. But now
let's see what going to happen if the
user go and query the table from the
CATS. So in the table of the CATS, we
are still having the data from
yesterday. All those new updates from
the original data will not be reflected
in this new table because once the user
selects something from this table, the
database will not go and query or fetch
the new changes from the original table
because we have already prepared the
data from yesterday. So that means our
user now is getting old data from the
CTAs table and the only way to get new
fresh data from the CTIS is to reexecute
the CTIS query. And of course this is
another step and it is harder to
maintain the table from the CTAs and
this is a big difference for the users
between the views and the tables from
the CTAs. Now think about views you are
ordering a pizza at restaurants. So
every time you are quering the view you
are placing an order the chef going to
go and make a pizza from the scratch
using the freshest ingredients. So that
means you are always getting a fresh hot
pizza. And think about the CTS as like a
frozen pizza from a grocery store. The
pizza was prepared earlier and stored in
the freezer. And if you want to eat it,
you have to go and heat it up in the
oven. But it's still not like a fresh
pizza that is made on the spot and from
the scratch. Now I made myself hungry
because I love pizza. So I think I'm
going to go for a quick break.
[Music]
Okay, so now let's check quickly the
syntax of those two methods. The first
one is create insert. So first step we
have to go and create a table using a
DDL statements. So we use the command
create and then we have to tell SQL are
we creating a table or view. In this
scenario we are creating a table and
then we specify the name of the table.
Then after that we have two parenthesis
and inside them we make a list of all
columns that we need inside this table.
So we have two columns the ID and the
name. And after that we are defining the
data type of those columns and maybe as
well the length. There are a lot of
options that we can add to this syntax
but now we are just checking the
simplest form of creating a table. Now
the next step is that we need an insert
statement. So we are saying insert into
our new table the following values. we
are inserting the id number one and the
value for the name going to be frank. So
this is a classical way on creating new
table and inserting data to it. Now
let's move to the second method the cas.
Now this time we have an SQL query like
select from where and some extra logic.
So this is our query and then we're
going to go and put our query inside a
DDL statement. It's like we have done it
in the views. It's exactly like we have
done it in the views but this time
instead of saying view we're going to
say table. So again we have the create
command and we are creating a table then
the name of the table and then we say as
and then we have two parenthesis and
inside them we have our query and this
is where the name come from create table
as select cas. So it is very simple in
one statement you have everything you
are creating a new table and as well you
are inserting the data that comes from
this query. Now this syntax is used in
databases like MySQL, Postgress and
Oracle. But in MySQL we have like a
shorter way on how to do it. Again we
have our query select from where. But
now in SQL server we can insert a
command between the select and from like
this. So we are saying select the
following columns into new table. So we
have this keyword into then the table
name and then you continue after that
with your query from where aggregations
and so on. So here it's like the DDL is
inside your query itself but in the
other databases you can have like the
query is separated from the DDL
statements. Personally, I prefer this
syntax than having this into because if
you have like big complex query, this
can be really hard to see and to miss
the column selection. So, this is the
syntax of creating a new table from a
query the CTAs in different
[Music]
databases. Okay. So, now we're going to
check the scenarios and use cases where
it makes sense to use. So, let's start
with the first one. Now we have learned
before it makes sense to have a complex
logic stored inside the database so that
our end users don't have to keep
repeating the same logic over and over
and it's as well maybe complicated for
some users. So that's why we have used
views and the result of the view going
to be used from our users. So everything
can stay easy and friendly to consume
for our users. But now what might happen
is that the logic of the view could be
very complicated and needs a lot of time
to be executed from the database. So it
takes really long time until we get the
intermediate result from the database.
So that means if it's going to takes 30
minutes then each users has to wait 30
minutes until the query is executed and
none of your users going to be happy
with this situation. In this scenario,
if this happens, you have to try maybe
to optimize the query. But if you cannot
do anything about that, you have to
switch the view to CTAs table. So now
what you have to do, you have to take
the same logic and then put it
in so that the intermediate results are
stored in a table. And of course at the
moment of creating the table, it will
take 30 minutes. It will take long time
because it is the same query and the
database going to need the time until
creating the intermittent results. But
the big advantage is that once
everything is prepared maybe at the
night at the morning once your users are
like online and start querying the data
they have everything prepared. So the
user is going to go and start selecting
and analyzing the intermediate result
but this time using the table that you
have created from the CTAs and the
response time going to be for all users
again normal and fast. So if you have a
scenario where your views are very slow
you have to go and prepare the data at
the night using the CTIS and prepare the
tables to be analyzed from the end
users. So this is the most common use
case for the CTIS and this scenario
happens a lot in projects where you
decide to go instead of views to go with
the CTIS in order to have persistence
data and you gain performance. Okay, so
finally back to SQL let's go and create
a table using now we're going to go and
create a table that shows the total
number of orders for each month. Let's
go and do it. So first what do we need?
We need a query. So let's write it.
select. I'm going to go with the date
name in order to get the name of the
month from our order dates and we're
going to call it order month. And then
we're going to go and aggregate the data
by counting the order ID for total
orders from our table sales orders. Uh
don't forget to group by our month. So
something like this. Let's go and
execute it. So the result is very
simple. We have the order month and the
total orders. So we have two columns and
three rows. So we have our query and of
course we didn't create anything yet.
Now in SQL server in order to create a
table from the query what we're going to
do exactly before the from we're going
to write into and now we have to specify
the schema and the table name. I'm going
to stay with the schema sales and I'm
going to call it monthly
orders like this. So that means we have
our query and the DDL is exactly between
the from and select. So now if I go and
execute this what going to happen we
will not see here the result of the
query. We're going to get here like
three rows affected because this is a
DDL statement. It is not anymore a query
and the database is telling us I have
created now a table with three rows. So
now if you check our tables we don't see
it yet. Let's go and refresh and check
again the tables. Now we can see our
table here sales monthly orders. Now of
course we have to go and check whether
everything is fine. So let's go and
select the rows from our new table sales
monthly
orders. So let's go select it first and
execute. And now we can see again the
result of our query. But we are not
writing here the query. We are just
selecting it from the table. So our data
is stored in our table. And we can go
and check the structure of this table.
So if you go to the columns you can see
we have here the order month and the
total orders and those informations
comes from our query. So SQL is saying
here the order month is a var which is
correct because here we have the names
of the month. So SQL is able to define
the data type of the table from our
query and the second column the total
orders it is an integer and that's
because we have here numbers. So as you
can see SQL is defining the structure of
the table based on the result of our
query over here. And of course the data
inside the table comes as well from the
query. And the result of this table
going to stay like this as long as you
don't change anything. So if you go and
close this and open it after one year
it's going to show exact same results.
So it's going to live in the database as
long as you don't drop this table. But
if things change in the table orders,
this table will not be updated
automatically like we have learned in
the views. So now if you want to say you
know what I would like to go and drop
this table well it is very simple just
go and say drop table and the table name
over here. So make sure you select it
and execute it. And now if you go over
here and refresh. So let's check the
tables. You can see here the table is
dropped. And now if you say you know
what let's go and refresh the table that
come from the CTAs every day so that we
always get refresh data inside this
table. So now let's go and execute again
our CIS. And with that if we go and
refresh we're going to find again our
table inside it. Now if you go and
execute it one more time in order to
refresh the data of the table what you
going to get? You're going to get an
error. The database going to tell you we
have already this table so we cannot
recreate it. So now the question is how
we can update the the content of this
table. Well, we have to go and drop it
first and then recreate it. And if you
want to put everything in one statement,
we have to go and use the TSQL. It is
transacts SQL. It's like extension where
you can do some programming inside SQL.
So in order to do that, what we're going
to do, we're going to go at the start
over here and we're going to make an if
logic. So we're going to go and search
for the objects. So we're going to say
if the object ID and now we have to go
and specify the name of this object
together with the schema. Make sure to
select everything sales monthly order
and put it inside here. And then we have
to define the type of this object. And
here we're going to go with you. It is
userdefined table. So we are saying if
the object sales monthly orders is not
null. So that means it exist. So what
you want to do? we have to go and drop
it. I'm going to take the statement from
here and then we're going to put it
after the if over here. So we are saying
if this table exist then drop the table
otherwise don't do anything because we
don't have any new table and the query
going to work and at the end of the TSQL
we have go in order to say the TSQL is
done and then our usual query after all
that. So let's go and execute the whole
thing and as you can see it is working.
So what happens? The database did find
this table and drop it and then executed
our query. So if you keep executing
this, you are just refreshing the
content of this table. So this is how we
work with the CTAs in
SQL. All right, moving on to another
common use case for the CTAs that I
usually use as well in my projects. We
use CDS in order to create a persistent
snapshot of the data at specific time in
order to analyze data quality issue. So
let's understand what this means. Now in
some scenarios you have like a table and
you are analyzing an issue. So there is
like a data quality issue at your data
and you are analyzing this scenario in
order to understand why it happens. But
the problem is that at the same time
there will be updates on the table and
your data is changing. So there will be
updates maybe on some fields or you are
getting new records and everything is
getting mixed up and you will not be
able to analyze the scenario where the
data quality issue happened. So now it's
almost impossible to find the ro cause
of your issue. But instead of that what
we do if we have like an issue of the
data we go and create a fixed persisted
snapshot of the data in a separate table
using CTS so that we make sure nothing
is changing and everything is fixed. And
with that I can keep doing my analysis
on the same data without the worry that
data are getting changed. So this is
another way why we use CTS in projects
to make sure that we have snapshot of
the data to ensure that our analyzes are
done on the same scenario that caused
the buck and going to be used as a
foundation for finding the problem and
fixing
it. All right, moving on to another use
case of the CTAs. We can use it in order
to create our data m to make it physical
data m instead of virtual data ms using
views. So let's understand what this
means now. As we learned before, if you
have a data warehouse system, our data
warehouse layer going to store the data
inside tables. But for the second layer,
the data m, we can go and use views in
order to have dynamic and flexibility in
order to generate multiple data ms. And
we called it the virtual layer. But now
in some scenarios if things get
complicated your data m and reports
going to be slow because there for each
action you are generating a query. So
the powerbi reports and dashboards are
creating queries in your data marts and
your data marts have always to go to the
data warehouse in order to retrieve the
data for the reports and the whole thing
could take minutes or maybe sometimes
hours. So in these scenarios we cannot
stay using views because they are
slowing everything down. But instead of
that we have to convert our data mart to
a physical layer. That means instead of
using views we have to go and use
tables. And one very common way in order
to generate the tables of the data marts
on daily basis is to use queries between
the data warehouse layer and the data
mart layer. It's still going to take
maybe 30 minutes. That's why you can go
and prepare the data at the night. But
at the reporting layer where things and
the performance really matters, the
performance going to be better because
the response time from the tables is way
faster than views and the reports don't
have always to waste time waiting for
the data marts to get data from the
warehouse. So this is another use case
where you use CTAs where the views at
the data marts are slow and we have to
go and replace them with stables using
CTAs to speed up things. But still my
recommendation here is that start first
with the views. So create a virtual data
mart using views because the
implementation going to be very dynamic
and fast and you are always getting
fresh data from the warehouse but maybe
later if you notice okay some data ms
and models are complex then maybe go and
replace few marts from views to tables
using cis. So this is another use case
for the and it is nice workaround for
your data warehouse system. All right
friends, so with that we have covered
now the first type of the tables that we
have in databases. The permanent tables
where you create a table and it's going
to live forever until you go and drop
it. Now we're going to talk about
another type of tables in databases. We
have the temporary tables. So let's
understand what are temporary
tables. So temporary tables or sometimes
you call them as a shortcut temp tables.
They store intermediate results in a
temporary storage in the database during
a session and the database automatically
drop these tables after the session
ends. So let's understand what this
means. Now we have learned in the CIS we
could use a query in order to retrieve
data from one table and then it puts the
intermediate results in brand new table
in the database. So with that we are
creating another table based on a query.
The same thing for the temporary tables.
We have as well a query that goes and
retrieves the data from a table and as
well the database going to go and create
new brand table in the database that has
the structure and the data from the
result of the query. So it is exactly at
the CTIS. What is the difference here?
Well, it is about the lifetime of the
table. Now the database tables that you
have created using create insert or CTIS
those tables going to stay permanent and
they're going to live in the database as
long as you don't drop them. So even if
the system is completely offline the
data going to stay at the database once
it is online again but the temporary
tables going to get deleted and dropped
from the database automatically once the
session ends. So what session means like
once you open the client and you connect
to the database and you are start doing
queries we call the time between
connecting ourself to the database and
disconnecting from the database we call
this a session. So that means once you
close the client and you disconnect from
the database and maybe shut down your PC
and do something else. What going to
happen? The database going to go and
destroy and delete all the temporary
tables that you have created during the
session. So that mean the table going to
live as long as you have a session and
you can access during this time the
table as you are accessing any other
permanent table. So this is what we mean
with temporary tables or sometimes we
call it as a shortcut temp
[Music]
tables. Okay. So now let's check the
easiest syntax ever. So for the
temporary table the syntax going to look
like this. you're going to have like a
query select from where and as we
learned in the CTIS if you go and say
into then the table name it's going to
go and create a physical new table but
now if you want it as a temporary table
what you going to do you're going to
just put hash before the name of the
table then SQL can understand okay now
we are talking about temporary table and
the database going to store it in that
temporary storage so it is very simple
this is the syntax of that temporary
tables so so far we have learned that we
have a database called sales DB and
inside it we can find the tables that we
have created the customers, employees,
orders and so on. Those are our tables
and they are always there like if you go
and close everything and then start it
or in the next day you're going to find
always those tables with the same data.
So they're going to exist as long as we
are not dropping them. Now the question
is where do we find the temporary
tables? Well, as we learned, if you go
over here at the system databases, you
will find multiple databases from the
SQL server and normally only the
database administrator has an access to
this and one of those databases called
temp DB, temporary database. So, let's
go inside it. Now, we can find multiple
objects and one of them we can find here
the temporary tables. And now, of
course, we don't have anything inside it
because we didn't create anything. So,
let's go and create one. We have already
an open session and active session with
the SQL server. As you can see here, we
are connected to the database and we can
start creating temporal tables. So now
what is the plan? I would like now to do
few modifications on the table orders.
But I will not do it directly at the
table orders. I would like to take a
copy from the sales DB and create from
it a temporary table. So let's go and do
that. What do we need first? We need a
query. So I would like to select
everything all the columns all the rows
from the table orders. So from sales
orders. So this is my query. Now so far
nothing is created. We have only select
statements. But now in order to create a
temporary table what we're going to do
we're going to put a statement between
the select and from. So exactly before
the from go over here and say into then
in order to make sure it is a temporary
table we use hash and then the table
name. So we're going to call it orders.
So that's it. We have our query and in
between we have the into and make sure
you are using hash in order to be a
temporary table. So let's go and execute
it. And now we can see that 10 rows are
affected and we don't have any error.
And now of course we cannot see it yet
because we have to go and refresh the
object explorer. So let's go and do
that. And now let's expand it. And now
we can see our temporary tables. As you
can see it is at the schema dbo because
we haven't defined any schema. And this
is the default one from the database. So
nice. Now we have the table and let's go
and check few stuff. So let's go and
select the table itself. So select star
from and make sure to say hash orders.
Let's go and select it. And now we are
getting the data from the temporary
table and not from the original table.
The orders in the database sales DB. So
all those informations comes from the
temporary table. Now, of course, you can
do whatever you want to this temporary
table because it's not that important
and it's anyway going to get deleted.
So, let's say that I would like to
delete all the orders where the order
status equal to delivered. So, let's go
and do that. What we're going to do
delete from our hash orders. So, make
sure we are selecting the temporary
table and then where we're going to say
the
order status equal to what I say
delivered. Yeah, delivered. So delivered
like this. Let's go and execute it.
Okay, with that it says five rows are
affected. Let's go and select it again.
So
select from
orders and let's check that. So as you
can see now we don't have all orders. We
have only the orders where the status
equal to shipped. So all delivered
orders are removed. And now we can do
whatever we want to this copy. We can
analyze it. We can modify it. We can go
and insert a new data. So we can do
whatever manipulation we want on this
copy. And now if you say, you know what,
I like this result and I would like to
have it not only during the session.
Maybe I'm going to need it for tomorrow
or something. So now what we're going to
do, we're going to do the exact
opposite. We're going to now store the
result of the temporary table back to
our database so that we don't lose this
intermediate result. So in order to do
that, we're going to say into and then
make sure to specify the sales dot
because we want to select the correct
schema and then let's say it is orders
and I'm going to call it test like this.
So let's go and execute it. So it says
five rows are affected. Now we have to
see those informations in the sales DB.
We still don't have this table over
here. So right click on the DB and then
refresh it. So let's go again to the
tables. And now you can see we have our
new table orders test. So it is amazing
right? What we have done is we have took
a copy from the original table orders to
a temporary space. We have done some
modifications and play with the data and
we have done some analyzes and then the
end result of our temporary table. We
have loaded back to another new table
called orders test in order maybe in the
next day to keep working on it. So it is
really nice way to do changes in place
where you say you know what it is
temporary and whatever mistakes you
makes it's okay it is like playground.
So now we still have an active session
with the database and our temporary
table going to be always here. Now let's
see what going to happen if we end our
session. So in order to do that let's go
and just close everything. So I will
just close and we'll not store anything.
So with that we have now ended the
session. Let's go and start it again and
see whether we still have the temporary
table. So we have now again to connect
to the SQL server and now we have
another session. So that means the old
session is already lost. Let's go to the
databases to the system databases to the
temp DB and let's go to the temporary
tables. As you can see the database
already cleaned up everything and this
space is again empty for any new
temporary table that I'm going to
create. So as you can see once you close
the session everything going to get
lost. Now let's go back to our sales DB
over here to the tables. We can see the
table that we have created orders test
it is still living here and still has
like the data that we have created. So
this is how things works with the
temporary tables in
SQL. Now let's see how the database
server executed that temporary SQL. So
now let's say that you are as a data
analyst. You have created a query and
then you say into in a temporary table.
Now the database engine going to
identify the query and first it's going
to go and execute the query and then
it's going to go and execute it and
maybe we're going to get the data from
the table orders and after the query is
executed the database engine now has the
results. Now two things can happen.
First the database engine going to go
and store the metadata informations in
the system catalog. And now the second
thing the database engine going to
create a table but this time not in the
users but in the temporary storage in
the disk. So the table going to live
there for a short time. And now what you
can do you can write multiple SQL
queries that are doing maybe multiple
analysis on top of this table. So each
time you select something the database
engine has to go to the temporary
storage and fetch the data from there.
And now once you are finished and let's
say you close your client the session
between you and the database going to
ends and now the database going to
understand okay there is no more
connection to this user and it going to
go and clean up now the temporary
storage with any tables that are created
from this session. So that means the
database is automatically cleaning up
the storage maybe for other sessions. So
this is how the database engine works
with the temporary tables.
So now the question is why do we need
temporary tables? Let's see the
following scenario. Now let's say that
in our source database we have a table
called orders and now we would like to
go and load the table in our data
warehouse. We have to do several
transformations in order to prepare the
data for the analyzes in the data
warehouse. So maybe you have one query
to remove the duplicates and another one
to handle the nulls and maybe you are
doing filtering and cleaning up and the
last step you would like to aggregate
the data. And now of course those
queries those transformations want to
change the content of the table orders
and there is no scenario where you can
do that directly on the source database
and of course this is not allowed.
That's why in data warehousing we have
to go and get our own copy of the data
and then on top of this data we can do
our transformations. Now one way to do
this using the temporary tables. So you
have one script in order to extract the
data from the table orders and put it in
temporary table as an intermediate
results and then you come with the
transformations and all those queries
and they start manipulating and changing
the data of this extra copy in the
temporary table and the last step you
have the load where you go and load the
final version of the intermediate
results in the database. This is if you
would like to do the whole ETL before
inserting the data to the database. So
now the orders table and the final table
in the data warehouse both of them are
tables. So they are permanent tables and
they will stay there as long as we don't
drop them. So they are very important
tables. But now for the intermediate
results it is not that important. It is
just an intermediate step that we have
done in order to have our extra copy of
the data to manipulate it and so on in
order to prepare it to be inserted in
the data warehouse. So after we loaded
it in the data warehouse, this copy of
the data is not anymore important. It
shouldn't stay like for a long time.
That's why in this scenario, maybe we
can go and use the temporary tables
instead of normal tables for the
intermediate results. And that's because
only of one advantage is that the
database going to go and do an automatic
clean up after the host session ends. So
it comes out of the box automatically
from the database. So that means I don't
have to deal with the dropping mechanism
of this table for the next load. If
there is like something wrong in the
data warehouse, you would like always to
check the copy where the transformations
are done in order to debug and find
issues. So I don't normally use
temporary tables in these scenarios, I
use just normal tables. But for other
small projects, maybe this makes sense.
So this is one use case on when to use
the temporary tables in your projects.
We use it in order to store intermediate
results temporary until we are done with
the session and then once we are done
the database can go and drop that
temporary
table. All right guys, now a quick talk
about the temporary tables. To be
honest, I never use this in my projects.
If I need an intermediate results in one
query, I can go and use the CTEs. And if
my intermediate results is very
important then I put it in either view
or CTIS but it is nice technique to
learn maybe you can utilize it in one of
your
projects. All right guys so now let's
have a quick summary about tables.
Tables in database are like spreadsheet
or grid that contains columns and rows
and your actual data are stored in these
tables. And we have learned there are
two types of tables. We have permanent
tables and temporary tables. Permanent
tables lives in the database forever as
long as you don't drop them. But in the
other hand that temporary tables they
have short lifetime. They will be
dropped from the database once you end
the session. Now we have learned as well
there are two methods on how to create
tables in databases. The first method is
create insert. This method involves two
steps. The first one is defining and
creating the table and the second step
is by inserting the data inside this new
table. So you are creating something
from the scratch. And the second method
we call it CTAs. It create as well brand
new table but based on the result of a
query. So this type is done with only
one step but it always needs another
existing table. And we have learned as
well the difference between tables and
views where the main advantage of using
tables created from CTIS is that to
ensure the performance is fast enough at
the end of the users or your reporting
system. So we use CIS instead of views
if the logic of the view is very complex
and takes a lot of time to be executed
in the database. And one more nice use
case for the CIS is that we can go and
persist a snapshot of the data in order
to analyze a bug and data quality issue
and to ensure that we have the exact
data in order to find a solution for the
bug and the issue. Now we have learned
as well that we can use temporary tables
in order to store intermediate results
in a temporary storage and the main
advantage of the temporary table is the
database automatically drops all that
temporary tables when the session ends
and that's because for you the
intermediate results are not that
important to live long
time. Hey my friends. So we have learned
that in real data projects if you have a
database there will be a lot of
analytical use cases that want to access
your data and do analytics. And what
going to happen? They're going to write
complex queries because in many
scenarios they are doing complex
analyzes. And if you don't do anything
about it in your projects, you're going
to face a lot of challenges like
complexity and a lot of redundancy of
the same complex logic but from multiple
users and maybe performance and security
issues. And we have learned we have five
amazing techniques in order to solve
those problems. We have learned the
subqueries and cities and as well how to
create objects like views, CTAs and
temporary tables. So now what we're
going to do, we're going to go and
compare them side by side in order to
have a big picture about the advantages
and the disadvantages of each method. So
let's go and compare them. Okay. So now
we have our five methods and the first
criteria that I would like to compare
them is the storage type. We have
learned that if you are using subqueries
and CTE, what can happen? and the
database going to put the result of
those two techniques in the memory in
the cache so that later the main query
has a fast access to those intermediate
results. But in the other hand if you
are using temporary tables or tables
from CDS the new created table can be
stored inside the disk storage. And now
for the views as we understood there
will be no data storage and that means
we are not using any storage from the
database. Now if you are talking about
the lifetime so that means how long the
object going to live or persist in the
database. Now our three techniques sub
queries CTE and temporary tables all of
them going to live a short time in the
database. So all of them are temporary.
But now if you are talking about
creating objects using CIS and views
those two going to be permanent. So that
means they're going to live in the
database as long as you don't drop them.
Now we're going to compare them with
something similar is when the database
going to go and drop or delete those
objects. Now we have learned that the
subqueries and the cities have a short
time. They going to live only during the
execution of the query. So once the
query ends the database going to go to
the cache and delete everything. But for
the temporary tables they live little
bit longer as long as you are in the
session. But once you end the session,
the database as well going to go and
drop and delete your table. Now for the
objects that comes from the CIS and
views as we learned they are persistent
and permanent and the database can only
delete them if you ask the database to
do that by using the DDL command drop.
So the database will not delete anything
for these two. So now the next one is
the query scope like how we can access
those objects. Now for the subquery and
the CTE the scope is here very small. It
is accessed only from one single query.
The query itself where you write the
city and subquery. So you cannot access
it from external queries. But we have
learned that the temporary tables cis
and views you can access all those
objects from multiple queries. So that
means you can access those objects from
multiple external queries. Now the next
one if you are thinking about the
reusability if you look to the
subqueries they are very limited. the
subquery going to be used only in one
query and only in one place. So if you
need it in multiple places, you have to
go and repeat the same logic. So
subqueries are the worst with their
reusability. But now if you are talking
about the CTE, it is little bit better.
You still can access it only from one
single query but you can access it in
the same query from multiple places. So
you can access it multiple times from
different joins and you don't have to
repeat the same logics over and over.
But still it is limited because you have
only one query that is using the logic.
Now if you think about the temporary
tables I could say the reusability here
is medium and that's because you can
access the data by multiple queries but
only during this session. So once the
session is ended you cannot access it
anymore which means you have to recreate
it in order to reuse it again. So it is
more reusable than the city and the
subqueries but not that good like the
CTAs and views. Those techniques can
offer the highest reusability for you.
So they are always there for multiple
users from multiple queries. So it can
eliminate a lot of redundancies and you
have to do the job only once. Now moving
into the next one. If you are thinking
about the intermediate result of those
techniques, the question is how fresh is
the data? Is the data from these objects
always up to date? Now for the
subqueries and the cities they are
always up to date because the SQL is
executing the logic on the fly and
storing the data in the memory and
immediately after that going to come the
main query and get the data. So always
the intermediate results in the memory
are up to date. But now if you think
about that temporary tables and the CTIS
the query is only executed once and if
there is like any update and changes on
the original table you will not find
those changes in those objects and
that's because SQL executed once and
that's all. So if you query those tables
there is no guarantee that the data are
up to date. So if you want fresh data
you have always to drop the table and
create it again from the query. Now if
you are talking about the views they are
amazing they are always up to date
because views does not store any data.
So each time you ask the views for data
what's going to happen the database
going to go to the original table and
fetch the data to the view. So your data
are always fresh and up to date. So this
is a big picture about the behavior of
those advanced techniques that you can
use in SQL projects. And if you ask my
opinion my favorite is going to be the
views in the first place. Then in the
second in my list is the city. They are
amazing, but don't use more than five
CTEs in one query. Otherwise, it's going
to be really annoying and hard to read.
And then I'm going to say in the third
place, the sub queries. And then the
CDIS. I use CIS if the views are slow.
If that's a scenario, I'm jump to the
CDIS and create a permanent physical
tables from my query. And the last one
that I rarely use is the temporary
tables. So, this is how I rank those
techniques in my skill projects.
Now I would like to show you as well a
big picture on how things works in my
projects in order to see all those
different techniques and possibilities
that you can use. It's like a big
picture and recap. So story time. So you
have a database and things starts where
you have a database administrator or
let's say a data engineer that is
creating a new table from the scratch.
So he going to write a DDL statement in
order to create one physical table at
our database. And now our database table
is empty. That's why in the second step
he going to go and write an insert
statement in order to fill our new table
with data. Now once we have a table
we're going to give the access maybe to
a data scientist or data analyst in
order to start writing SQL queries. So
now the first thing that could happen
that the logic is complex and she has to
do that in two steps. So the first step
is a query that prepares the data in
order to execute the second step. So
that's why she going to go and use the
subquery and the main query going to go
and retrieve the data from the
intermediate results in order to prepare
the final results for the analyst. Now
what could happen is that there will be
an SQL logic in the query where it keep
repeating the scripts. So now instead of
writing another subquery for that she
going to go and put this logic in CTE
and now she going to go to the main
query and use the result of the CTE in
multiple places in the same query. So
all those stuff the sub queries and the
city queries the main queries all those
stuff happens in one single query and
now what could happen is that she is
writing an amazing code. So instead of
using it only in her query what's going
to happen she going to go and persist
this logic in the database. So she going
to put it as a view in the database so
that all other users and analysts can
benefit from this logic and they don't
have to write it again. So instead
they're going to go and query the view
and this going to makes the life easier.
And of course our data analyst can as
well use this view in the main query.
And now one more thing she has as well
another logic that is really complex and
as well everyone can benefit from it.
But the issue this query is very slow.
So now she has to decide do I put it in
view or do I create a new table based on
the query using CTAs. Now of course
because of the performance and the view
takes around 30 minutes to be executed.
She decided to execute the query using
the CTIS where she generate a physical
table so that all other analysts as well
can access this new table in order to
reuse the results and of course she can
use it in her main query and with that
now you have experience how things works
in real projects. It is not simple
select query from table it is like this
people are creating subquery CTE views
temporary tables CTAs for different
purposes. All right my friends. So
that's all about the CTIS and the
temporary tables. And with that we have
learned all the techniques on how to
organize our complex projects. Now next
we're going to start talking about
something completely different. We're
going to talk about the stored
procedures on how to put our code inside
the database. This is all about that
programmability and how to add stuff
like parameters, variables, error
handling. So it's like programming. So
let's go. So let's uncover this word of
the s procedures and let's go.
Now think about store procedures like
this. Every time you go to a coffee
shop, you say, "I would like a large
coffee with a coconut milk, no sugar,
and extra whipped cream." And you repeat
this over and over each time you go to
this coffee shop. And now, if you are
working with stored procedures, it's
going to be like this. Whenever you go
to the coffee shop, you just say, "Give
me my usual." and the barista know
exactly what you mean behind that and
you will get exactly your order without
specifying and repeating everything word
by word and this is exactly what's going
to happen if you work with stored
procedures so let's have some coffee
right all right so now we can continue
all right so now let's start again from
the scratch we have always these two
sides we have the client side and the
server side of the database and what we
have learned we have like a database and
you as a user you can go and create like
different SQL statements Like for
example, you can create like an SQL
select statements in order to retrieve
data from the database or another SQL
statements where you are inserting data
to the database and another one let's
say that you are updating the content of
your tables and so on. So you have like
different statements in order to
interact with the database. Now let's
say that what you are doing is not only
one time job you are keep repeating
those steps over and over. So you are
always like doing an insert then an
update and then a select and you keep
repeating that day after day. So now
imagine that you are doing something
crazy where you go in vacation but the
job should be done. So what you do you
hand over all those select statements to
your colleagues and they have to do it
every day as well as you are gone. So
you go and give them all those SQL
scripts and you tell them okay you have
to execute the first query then the
second query and then the third query.
This is of course not a good way on how
to do things because of course there
will be some human errors where like the
execution of the script is not correct
like first updating then inserting and
things can go wrong and that's exactly
why we have stored procedures in SQL. So
what we can do we can put all those SQL
statements together in one frame in one
program and we call it start procedure.
And now once you do that all your SQL
statements will not stay at the client
side they will be stored now in the
server side of the database. So that
means in store procedures we are storing
our SQL statements inside the database.
So you don't have to go and hand over
your SQL statements to your colleagues.
And now all what you have to do in order
to interact with your SQL statements is
to go and execute the store procedure.
So you write very simple command called
execute SP for example. So with that you
are calling your stored procedure that
is stored inside the server. And once
you execute this what can happen the
database going to go to the stored
procedure and start executing all the
SQL statements that you have inside the
store procedure and it's going to do it
exactly in the order that you have
defined. So from top to bottom. So now
once the database went through all your
SQL statements, it's going to return
back to the user the data that we have
from the selects. And with that things
are really easy and you can tell your
colleagues okay just execute this third
procedure and the rest can be done from
the database. So with that you minimize
the human errors and you make sure that
everything can be executed as you wish
and as well as you are back from your
vacation things are easier. You have to
just go and execute the third procedure.
So this is what we mean with start
procedure. You can store inside it
multiple SQL statements in specific
order and you can save it inside the
database and each time you need your SQL
statements you can go and simply execute
them. So now let's have a quick
comparison between a normal query normal
SQL statements compared to a stored
procedure. So a normal SQL query you
have like select from where and so on.
This is like one-time transaction. You
are asking the database for one thing
and the database is answering. So it is
like one-time request. But now in the
other hand in the stored procedures you
have multiple SQL statements and once
you execute the stored procedure there
will be many interactions with the
database in one go. So that means you
will have multiple transactions that is
happening in your store procedure. So an
SQL query it is like a simple request.
You need one thing and you are getting
it. But on the other hand in the start
procedure it is like a program. As you
are writing a code in any programming
languages it is more than one request it
has a lot of stuff like for example you
can go and build looping logic where we
go and iterate through something or you
can go and build a control flow where
you have a logic like the FL statements.
So there are like different paths in
your code and as well in programming we
have like parameters and variables in
order to make our code dynamic and
flexible and as well we can build error
handling on our code in order to
customize what can happen if there is
like an issue. So the store procedure it
is like having a code like for example
in Python. So that means you can do more
complicated stuff compared to a simple
query where you have only like one
request. So in the stored procedures you
are doing like programming and coding
and it is more advanced than only just
having a query. So that means if you are
working with stored procedures things
going to get more complicated and
advanced but of course you will get a
lot of flexibility and reusability
compared to a simple
[Music]
query. So now there is like another
alternative to stored procedures. Well,
you can go and put all your SQL
statements in a Python code and things
can work as well. So, either you put
your SQL statements inside the stored
procedure or in a Python code. But now
the big question is what are the
differences between them? Well, there is
like a disadvantage if you having Python
in different server because you have to
go and build a connection between your
server and the database server and
connection means always networking and
you might get slightly worse
performance. So this is one advantage
for the start procedure. Another
advantage for the search procedure that
all the scripts that you're going to
store inside the store procedure in the
database going to be pre-ompiled. So
pre-ompiled means the SQL database
servers knows already about your SQL
statements and there was already a check
whether all the syntaxes are correct and
the database as well going to be
preparing everything to execute the
stored procedure like maybe preparing
the execution plans and a lot of stuff.
So if you store your skill statements
inside store procedure in the database,
it is very close to the database and the
database knows everything about your
scripts and it is ready to execute it.
But if you put all your SQL statements
outside of the database, of course, the
database has no chance to understand
what is coming. So it cannot go and
compile anything until Python sends the
code to database. So this is another
advantage for the stored procedure. But
now if you build your SQL statements in
Python, you will get a lot of
advantages. Like for example, you can go
and build very flexible Python codes
where you can use Python features
together with the SQL and with that you
open the door of many possibilities and
flexibility. Another thing with Python,
you can make great version control. So
everything is integrated in Python
tools. And one more advantage is that if
you have a complex requirement in your
projects, it's going to be really hard
to implement it in stored procedures.
it's going to cost you a lot of lines of
code and things going to be not
comfortable. But if you are implementing
a complex logic in Python, things going
to be way easier. So with Python, you
can implement complex logics very easily
compared to the stored procedure. So
those are the big differences between
the stored procedure and Python. Now I
have to be honest with you about having
your code in store procedure or in
Python. Well, if you are working
together in a data project, I will never
recommend you to use stored procedure if
you have the possibility to have your
code in Python. And that's because I saw
a lot of projects using stored procedure
and most of them ends in chaos. It is
really hard to debug. It is really hard
to test. It's like catastrophic. So
really don't use in your projects any
store procedures. Especially if you have
like a big project and you have a lot of
data and tables and so on. You can
manage everything perfectly using
Python. Especially if you have platform
like data bricks or snowflakes then of
course the best way to control your data
projects is using Python. But of course
if you don't have this possibility and
you have only a database server and you
can only work with this then you don't
have any other option. You have to work
with the store procedures. But if you
have this possibility to put your
project inside Python and to run your
scripts from there, then it is way
better than having stored procedure.
Well, this is my opinion. I'm just
talking about working in projects in big
projects. But if you have like small
projects, few tables and so on, then
it's fine to stay with the store
procedure. But never build a big project
using stored procedures because I tell
you it will never work. So try to always
to think about to have the right
platform in order to run your projects.
And now I'm thinking about it. Maybe I
should have put this tip at the end of
the video, not in the middle. So
whatever. If you still want to learn
store procedures, we're going to
continue on that. And I'm going to have
like a really nice example about how to
build store procedures step by step like
having a mini projects. So why not
learning both of them. So let's
go. Okay. So now let's have a quick look
to the syntax of the store procedure. It
is very simple. So it has always two
parts. First we have to define the start
procedure. So we can do it like this.
Create procedure. Then we have to define
the procedure name and then we say as
and then we have begin and end. It's
very important for SQL to understand
when that definition starts and when it
ends. And then between the begin and end
we're going to have a set of SQL
statements. So here you can insert
whatever you want. Insert update queries
anything. And once you have defined the
sort procedure the next step is that
we're going to go and execute it. So the
syntax is very simple. We're going to
say execute and then the procedure name.
So that's it with that SSQL going to go
to the S procedure and start executing
all the SQL statements that you have in
the definition. So this is the syntax of
the S procedure. As I said it is very
simple. All right guys. So now let's do
it step by step. The first step is that
we're going to go and write a query. So
let's say that we have a very simple
task and it says for US customers find
the total number of customers and the
average score. So let's go and do it.
It's very simple. So select count star
total customers and then the average of
scores as average score from our table
sales customers and then since it says
US customers we have to go and filter
the data based on the column country is
equal to USA. So that's it. This is our
query. Let's go and execute it. So we
have a very quick nice report about the
total number of customers and the
average score. So now let's say that I
have a weekly meeting and I have to
represent this reports over and over. So
that means I have to go and execute this
query like frequently in weekly basis in
order to get the data for the reports.
So now what this means I have to go and
save this query in order to use it later
that each time I have to rewrite it. So
that means I have to store this text
somewhere that I don't go and rewrite
the query over and over. So what I
usually do, let's go and we copy the
whole query and then we create a new
text and let's say it's going to be my
weekly query and it's going to be SQL.
So I'm going to go and edit it and here
I'm going to save my query and each time
I need this query I have to go and copy
it, go back to my SQL and then I'm going
to go and paste it in order to execute
it. So either going to write it each
time or copy and paste it. Well, we
don't have to do that. we have start
procedures. So that means we're going to
go to the step two where we're going to
turn this query into a store procedure.
So let's do that. It's very simple. So
we're going to say create procedure. And
now we have to go and give it a name. So
it's going to be get customer summary.
And then after that we're going to say
as and then we need the begin and end.
And in between we're going to put our
query. So let's go and copy our query
and just put it in between. So that's
it. Let's go and execute it. And with
that we have created our store
procedure. And now in order to see our
store procedure we can go to the object
explorer to our database sales DB. And
then here we have a folder called
programmability. So let's go inside it.
And here we have a lot of stuff like
functions, triggers and we have stored
procedures. So let's go inside it. And
we can see over here this is our new
created stored procedure. So we are
almost there. The next step is that
we're going to go and call our store
procedure. And this is the easiest part.
So it's going to be execute the stored
procedure. And the syntax is very
simple. So execute and then the name of
the stored procedure. So get customer
summary. So let's go and execute it. And
with that as you can see we get the
result of our query. So as you can see
it is very simple. In just few steps we
created a store procedure. And then in
the future you don't need the whole
thing. You just go and execute the store
procedure. I don't have to store the
query locally at my PC or to copy and
paste anything. If I want this report
now, I just have to execute the store
procedure like this and I will get the
results. Okay. So now let's keep moving.
Now we're going to talk about the
parameters inside stored procedures. So
what is a parameter? It is like a
placeholder where you can pass in
information from you into the store
procedure while running it and using
parameters in store procedure it's going
to make it flexible reusable and
dynamic. So let's understand what this
means. Let's say that you got a new
task. So it says for German customers
find the total number of customers and
the average score. So that means now we
have like to generate two reports one
for USA and one for Germany. And in both
of them you are doing the same
aggregation. And again we have to go and
start writing the query. It's going to
be very similar to the one that we have
in the previous example. So we are doing
the same stuff same aggregations but the
only change here is that we're going to
use another value to filter the data. So
instead of USA we're going to go and say
here Germany. So let's go and execute
this one over here. And with that we can
see we have total number of customers
too. So this is the report that we have
to provide like in weekly basis. And
again in order not to go and copy paste
stuff we're going to go and create a
store procedure for that. At the end
we're going to have an end. But now of
course we cannot have like the same
names we're going to go and say here
Germany. So let's go and execute it. And
the next step we have to go and execute
the store procedure. So like this. Let's
go and execute it. And the whole logic
now stored inside the database. Let's go
and refresh on the explorer over here.
And you can see now we have two stored
procedures. But now you have to feel
there is something wrong. Always in
programming and coding. If you find
yourself repeating the same task over
and over then there is always a smarter
way on how to optimize that. Repeating
stuff in coding is always bad thing. So
now clearly we are repeating the same
query in two different store procedure.
And now if you compare them you see it's
because of the value. So we have here
the value for the filter once Germany
and one USA. And those values are static
values. So it's always going to stay
inside the store procedure as USA. But
instead of that we can replace those
static values with a parameter. And then
you decide as you are executing the
stored procedure for which country you
want to execute the store procedure. So
let's go and do that. I'm just going to
remove everything from here and focus
only on the first store procedure. Now
what we're going to do after giving the
name of our store procedure we have to
define our parameter. So it start with
at and with that SQL understandhuh now
we are talking about parameters and we
need now the name of the parameter. So
it's going to be country. It could be
any name that you want and after that we
have to define for SQL the data type.
It's like when you are creating a table
and you define columns you assign a data
type for each column. The same thing
here you have to assign as well a data
type for each parameter. So we're going
to use the data type in var and for the
countries it's enough to have the length
of 50. So with that we are telling SQL
for this third procedure we can pass an
information to the store procedure and
this information and value going to be
used inside this parameter. So now after
we defined this parameter over here we
can go and use it anywhere inside our
query. And of course we want to go and
use it instead of this static value. So
now we're going to remove this static
value and instead we're going to have
the parameter. So now we are saying
you're going to filter the table based
on the value that comes from the user
and not anymore static with a USA. And
as I said you can use this parameter
everywhere like even here in the select
statements. So it is a value that could
be used everywhere in your query. So
that's it. We have defined our new
parameter and we have used this
parameter in our query. So now we have
to go and update the store procedure. We
cannot leave it as create. Instead of
that, we're going to say alter. So we
are saying alter procedure and with the
new informations. Let's go and execute
it. And now we have to go and execute
it. So now what we're going to do, we're
going to say execute get customer
summary. But now our store procedure is
expecting a value from you from the
input. So we're going to do it exactly
like we done in the name over here. So
we're going to say the parameter country
is equal
to Germany. So that means the value of
this parameter come from me come from
the input and this information going to
be passed to my query to the store
procedure. So let's go and execute it.
And with that as you can see we are
getting the report of customers for
Germany. And now if you say okay let's
go and generate the report for USA. All
what you have to do is replace the
parameter. So in the value instead of
Germany we're going to say USA. So let's
go and execute it. Great. Now we are
getting as well the report for us
customers. So that seems my friends for
those two reports I just need one store
procedure and with the help of the
parameter I made my store procedure now
more flexible and professional. So this
is exactly the power of the parameters
it makes everything reusable and
dynamic. And now of course we don't need
the store procedure for Germany. So what
we can do we can go and drop it. So
we're going to say drop procedure and it
was like this Germany. So we don't need
this store procedure and we're going to
stay with only one dynamic store
procedure. So this is how to use
parameters in store procedure and why
it's important. Okay. So now to the next
step is that we can go and add default
values for the parameters. So let's say
that I execute very frequently this
report where I say the country equal to
USA and I don't want each time to define
the parameter value equal to USA. So if
you are using a value very frequently
you can add it as a default inside the
definition of the store procedure and it
is very simple. So if you go to the
definition again over here after the
parameter and you say equal to USA. So
now it's very important to understand
that the country will not be always
equal to USA. It is just you are saying
if I don't get from the user any value
then as a default I'm going to go and
use the USA. So let's go and again
change the definition of our stored
procedure using alter. So execute and
now we can go to our store procedure and
I can skip the whole thing over here and
execute it. So now as a default I'm
getting the report of USA without
passing an information to the store
procedure because I know it is as a
default USA. But if you need it as a
Germany of course you have to go and
define it. So you say execute the store
procedure where the country equal to
Germany. So if you execute it like this
SQL still going to use your value. So
the value that comes as an input from
the user has more priority of course as
the defaults. And with that we are
getting the Germany reports. So as you
can see it's really nice right using
parameters in store
procedure. All right moving on to the
next step. Now we can work with multiple
queries inside one stored procedure. And
this is what we have learned at the
start. We can have multiple SQL
statements in one stored procedure. And
now we have a new report and query to
generate. It says find the total number
of orders and the total sales. So let's
do it quickly. We can write it like
this.
Select counts order ID. This is the
total orders and then the sum of sales.
Total sales from our table sales orders.
And of course we are always creating a
report based on specific country. So
that means we have to go and join it
with the customers table in order to
filter the data. So on customer ID equal
to the customer id. And now we're going
to go and filter the data. So country
equal to USA. So something like this.
Let's go and execute it. And with that
for the US customers, we have six orders
and the total sales 180. And of course,
the same thing we're going to do for
Germany. So now, of course, we will not
go and create an extra store procedure.
For this, we're going to go and put
everything in one store procedure. So
let's go and copy the whole thing and
put it here inside. So after the first
report we're going to have the second
report and now the best practice here if
you have multiple queries in store
procedure go and add at the end of each
query a semicolon. It is just easier to
understand how now this is the end of
this query especially if you have like a
big complex queries where you have CTE
union and so on. It's going to be really
hard to understand that we are talking
now about completely new query but it is
not like something the database requires
it but it's just easier to read. So just
add semicolons at the end of each query.
So now let's go and execute the whole
thing in order to change the definition
of our query. And one more thing of
course don't forget we don't need static
values over here. We're going to go and
add our nice
parameters. So add country. So I think
with that we have everything is ready to
be executed. So let's go and change the
definition of our store procedure. And
now let's go and start with the defaults
where the country equal to USA. So let's
go and execute it. And now in the output
as you can see we have two results. And
that's because we have two queries. So
the first report is for the first query
and the second one for the new one that
we just created. And the same thing if
you go and execute the store procedure
for Germany we will get as well two
results. And here we can see we have
four orders and 200 of total sales for
Germany. So as you can see it's very
simple. You can go now and add multiple
SQL statements not only queries you can
go and update you can do an insert
delete any kind of SQL statements you
can just go and add it inside your
program. And as usual SQL going to
execute it from the top to the bottom.
So since this is the first SQL statement
it's going to execute it first and then
after that it's going to go to the next
one. So this is how you can add multiple
SQL statements to your store
procedure. All right everyone. So now
we're going to talk about the variables.
So what is a variable? It is like a
placeholder where you store inside it a
value in order to use it later inside
your stored procedure. So that means
variable holds like a value inside the
memory and you can reuse it everywhere
you want inside your stored procedure
but it's not like the parameters.
Parameters are something like outside
the store procedure. It's an input from
the one that is executing the store
procedure and the store procedure has to
adapt with the parameter. But a variable
it's something that lives inside the
store procedure and we use it as a
developers in order to make our code
dynamic and to move a value from one
place to another. So let's have a very
simple example now. Let's say that we
don't want our report here about the
total customers as a query. So I don't
want it as a result in the output. Let's
say I'm generating a report always like
this. We are saying the total customers
from Germany equal to two and the
average score from Germany is equal to
425. So I need it as a text not as a
table like here. So in order to do that
we can use the TSQL print in order to
give a message after executing the store
procedure. So the syntax of print is
very simple. So we can go over here and
say print and then we have single quotes
and let's go and get the whole message
from here without the comments and then
the semicolon and we can repeat that for
the second message. So for the average
score and we put it over here as well a
semicolon. Now if you do it like this
this message going to be always static.
So we will have always like two for the
total customers and the average score
going to always be like this even though
that the data is changing. So we cannot
have it static like this. We have to
make it dynamic and especially if we are
calling this function for USA. So we
cannot have it here as a Germany. So
let's see how we can make this dynamic.
Now let's start with the easy stuff.
Instead of the Germany over here we can
go and put our parameter right. So
instead of this so we're going to say at
country but now the problem is it is
part of the whole string we cannot do
that so we're going to stop the text and
you can see the coloring is changing and
then have a plus in order to have
concatenations. So this text comes first
then the value from the country and then
we're going to have as well the double
point as a static text and again a
concatenation and then we have the two
we can talk about later. So let's do the
same stuff over here. So we're going to
say plus add country caring is not
changing because of this code. So let me
just remove it and then afterward plus
make it static again plus and remove the
final quotes. So with that in the
message we have now dynamic where we get
the value of the country from the
parameter. And now we come to the
interesting part. We have here an issue
those two values they come from this
query. And of course we cannot use a
parameter for that. We have to use now
the variables. Now in order to make a
variables we have three steps. The first
step is that we have to tell SQL about
our new variable. So SQL can prepare and
make like placeholder for it in the
memory. So we have to tell and prepare
it with our new variables. Now usually
we do all the declarations of our
variables at the start of the store
procedure immediately after begin. So
that means we're going to go over here
and say declare and now after that it's
like the parameters. It's very simple.
So at total customers. So this is the
name of the variable. And after that we
have to define the data type. Of course
you have to understand the data type
from the query. Since we are saying
count star then the output going to be
an integer. That's why we're going to
write it like this. So integer. And now
we need another one for the average. So
what we're going to do we're going to
make a comma. Now we are declaring
another variable. So at average score
and the data type of this one going to
be float because we have an average. So
that's it for the first step. We are
telling SQL we have two variables and
SQL going to go and create an empty
placeholder. So now in the second step
we have to give our variables a value.
So where we going to get the values?
We're going to get it from the query. So
let's do that. Now let's start with the
first column. As you can see we have
here the count star. And as we learned
anything that we write on the right
side, it going to be like an alias for
the column. But in SQL if you go and
write something before it, it going to
be the variable. So we can do it like
this. at total customers and then equal.
So now we are saying whatever value this
query returns it should be stored inside
my new variable so that I'm assigning
values to my variable. But here there is
one thing that we cannot have any more
aliases because our query will not
return any results. Our query have now
only one task to assign values to my
variables. So that's why we cannot have
it like this. We have to remove the
alias. And the same thing we're going to
do it for the average. So at average
score equal to the average score and we
have to remove the alias. So that's it.
Now our query having different purpose.
It is not for returning result. It is to
assign values to our variables. So now
we have values in the next step we have
to go and use it. And we can use our
variables everywhere inside our store
procedure. So it could be in the print,
it could be in the next query. So in any
select statements in any place.
Sometimes we use variables in order to
pass an information from one query to
another one. But in this example, we
want to use our variables inside the
prints. So it is very simple. We now
we're going to go and replace the static
number and it's like the parameter.
We're going to say at total customers
and the same thing for the average at
average score. So that's it. It's very
simple. So again the step one we have to
declare them to define it for SQL and
with that we're going to get an empty
variable. The second step we have to add
values to those variables and the last
step we have to go and use those
variables. So it makes sense right now
if you check our message over here you
can see that everything is dynamic and
we don't have any static values but
there is one more thing that's in the
print everything should be as a string.
So we cannot have dates numbers floats
and so on. So that's why you have to
make check if you're adding any
parameter and variables all of them
should be string. So the country it is
okay because we have the data type of
varchar but the total number and the
average score this is not really good
because they have different data type
and we have to go and now cast those
data types to another one. So we're
going to say cast and we're going to say
here as invar so that we don't get any
errors from SQL. So cast as well here as
in
vchar like this. All right. So I think
we are ready. Let's go and change the
definition of our store procedure in
order to test. So let's go and execute.
Perfect. And now let's go and test. So
let's start with the defaults where we
have the parameter as USA. So now as you
can see we are getting one result and
this is from the second query. So the
first query is not returning anything
anymore in the output. But if you go to
the messages over here, you can see we
have a new message. It says total
customers from USA is equal to three and
the average score from USA is equal to
825. And this is exactly what we wanted
for our reports. Now let's go and
execute the parameter equal to Germany.
Again, we have only one result. And in
the messages, we're going to get total
customers from Germany is equal to two
and the average score from Germany is
equal to 425. So this is exactly how we
work with the variables. We use it in
order to hold one information in one
place in order to reuse it later in
different place. So that's it for
[Music]
variables. All right everyone. Now we're
going to talk about how to control the
flow in your store procedure and we're
going to learn how to do that using the
if else statements. So now let's have
the following scenario. Now if you check
our query over here we are doing the
average of score and if you check the
data you can see that in the scores we
have nulls and nulls are really bad for
aggregations. So we usually have to
clean up our data before doing any
aggregations. And in this scenario we
can understand null as a zero. And how
we going to clean up and handle the
data? We're going to go and make an
update on our table where we say if
there is like a null then make it as a
zero. And we will do this as a pre-step
inside our store procedure. So that
means first we have to clean up the data
and then afterward we're going to
generate the reports. And this is what
we usually do inside SQL projects. So
the logic going to be very simple. We
have to check first do we have nulls
inside the score. If the answer is yes
then we have to go and update the null
values to zero. But if the answer is no,
we don't have any values then we can
skip everything. So now we're going to
go and build this logic inside our store
procedure in order to clean up and
prepare the data. So let's go. Okay. So
now this part we're going to call it
generating
reports and we're going to have another
part called prepare and clean up data.
So now let's prepare first the structure
of the if statements. So the syntax
going to look like this. So if and then
begin and end. So this is the block of
the if and we're going to do the same
thing for the else. So we have else and
we have begin and end. Let me just
separate them. So now how this works? We
have to create a condition. If the
condition is met then the if statement
going to be executed. But if the
condition is not fulfilled and we have
false then the else statement going to
be executed. So what is the condition?
We have to check whether there is null
inside the scores. So let's write a very
simple query. It's going to say select
one from sales
customers where score is null and always
we have to check the country equal to
let's say USA. So let's go and execute
this one over here. So now we are
getting in the output a results. If we
are getting a results that means
somewhere there are nulls. But if you go
for example and say here Germany and
execute the same query in the output you
see that we don't have any results. That
means for the German customers we don't
have any nulls in their scores. So if
this query returns something we have
nulls. If it didn't return anything then
there is no nulls. And we're going to
use exactly this query as a condition.
So we're going to take our check and say
if exists and then two parenthesis and
then we put our query. So what we are
saying if exist if this query return
anything then go and execute the next
block and if it is not exist that means
it is not returning anything then go and
execute the second block. So it's a
logic right it's very simple now of
course instead of having a static value
over here we can use our parameter so at
country and now we have to tell SQL what
to do if it exists. So in between we can
have like an update statement. So update
sales customers and we're going to set
the score equal to zero. But very
important we have to go and use where
condition otherwise it going to go and
update everything. The score is
null and the country equal to our
parameter country. So with that we are
updating exactly the nulls for specific
country. And let's have a semicolon at
the end. And at the start maybe I'm
going to say just to have a nice message
in the output print and we can have a
message updating null scores to zero and
as well a semicolon at the end. So if
there is any nulls then execute the
whole thing print the message and update
the table. So now the next step is that
we're going to go and tell SQL what can
happen if the condition is not
fulfilled. That means we don't have any
nulls. Well we don't have to update the
table at all because we don't have to
clean up anything. But I'm going to go
and make print over here. So print and
we're going to give the message no null
scores found. And at the last end I'm
going to go and put a semicolon. So
that's it. This is our logic. We are
checking our condition and then we
execute if the condition is met where we
update the table with zero instead of
null and if the condition is not met
then don't do anything. Just print a
message. Now you might say you know what
why you are doing this? we just can use
this update statements and we don't need
the whole if else statements. So why we
are checking in the first place? I can
like each time I run this store
procedure I go and update all the nulls
if they exist to a zero. Well, this is
not really professional because you are
wasting resources. So each time you run
an update statement like this. So
imagine that you have a big table and
each time you run your store procedure,
SQL have to go and check whether there
is any nulls and so on. And this is of
course consume resources. It's way
better if you go and check first whether
it's really needed. So that's why we are
doing this logic. Now as you can see our
store procedure is getting bigger and
bigger. So we have like two parts. The
first part is preparing and cleaning up
the data. And the second part we are
generating reports. Let's go and update
the whole thing and execute it. And now
we have to do it step by step. So let's
check our query over here. And you can
see we have here null for USA customers.
So let's go first execute it for the USA
as a defaults. And now let's go and
check the messages. It's saying updating
null scores to zero. That means the
first block is executed because SQL did
find a customer with a null. And with
that the average of scores going to be
different than previously. So we have
now more accurate average in our
reports. So if you go and check our
query again, you can see now we have a
zero instead of null. Let's go and
execute it for Germany like this. And
let's go and check the messages. It says
no null scores found. And that is
correct because for Germany we don't
have any nulls. So with that we have
created a control flow using the FL
statements. And as you can see we are
not doing any more like simple queries.
We are creating like a mini program. And
now it's like an ETL where first we
prepare the data and second we generate
reports. And you can imagine a real
project how big those stored procedures
going to get where you have a lot of
tables and a lot of things to
do. Okay. So now we're going to talk
about the error handling in store
procedure. Error handling it is like
essential things to do while programming
because it gives you the control on what
can happen once you have an error. And
there's a lot of things that you can do
like maybe deleting data, printing a
very structured like message or maybe
doing some logging and so on. So you
have a full control on what to do if
there is an error and of course we can
do that in the store procedure. So now
let's check the quickly the syntax. It
is usually has two parts. The first part
is the try part. So the syntax is like
this begin try end try. So you are
defining the boundaries of the try and
in between you going to have all your
SQL statements and your code and the
second part going to be the catch parts.
So you say begin catch and end catch. So
you are defining the boundaries and then
in between you can tell SQL what to do
if there is like an error. So what is
try and catch? Like the word it says try
it's like you are attempt to do
something that might fail. So you are
telling SQL try to execute this code. So
the SQL going to go and try to execute
your codes. And if any error happens
while executing your codes, the SQL
going to jump to the second block and
start doing whatever you have defined in
the catch. But if there is no errors at
all, this part will not be executed. So
the catch is like your backup plan. If
something goes wrong here, then go to
the plan B and do something. So let's
see the workflow of the try catch. So
first the SQL going to go and execute
the try and then it going to check is
there any error. If we don't have any
error then everything ends and that's
it. But while execution if the SQL face
any error what going to happen it going
to go and execute the catch. So as you
can see the workflow is very simple and
this is what we mean with try and catch.
So let's go back to SQL to have some
example. All right. So now back to our
store procedure. Let's go and introduce
an error inside our code. So let's go
over here and maybe in our query we're
going to go and divide by zero which is
of course a problem. So we have this
error over here and let's go and update
the logic of our store procedure. And
now if you go and execute it. So let's
go and do that. We will get an error
saying yeah you cannot divide by zero.
But now what I would like to do I would
like to have something else where we
have customized message when error
happens. So I would like to have the
control on which information should be
displayed if there is an issue. And in
order to do that we have to use the try
and catch. So it's going to be very
simple. Now this is my whole code. So
the whole thing from preparing to
generate the report the whole thing is
my code and we have to put the whole
thing in a try. So how to do that?
Exactly after the first begin we're
going to have another begin but for the
try. And now what we're going to do,
we're going to go to the last end over
here and have an end try. So with that
we put now the whole code inside the
try. And after that we're going to
introduce the catch. So begin catch and
end catch. And now in between we have to
tell SQL what can happen if we encounter
an error. And here we can do many stuff
but I would like now to focus on
customizing the error message. Let's
start with the first one. So I'm going
to say print let's say an error
accord. This is the first thing. Then on
the next line I'm going to print more
informations. And now we're going to say
the error message. So error message
double point space. And now we can go
and use some predefined functions from
SQL like for example the error
message. This function going to return
the description of the error like the
one we have here divide by zero error
encountered and we can go and keep
adding stuff the way that we need like
maybe the error
number. So we can have it like this and
for that we have as well a function
called error number and I think we have
to cast this one because it is a number
and in the messages we have to have only
vchar. So this going to be as int var
like this and we can keep adding stuff
to our message like for example let's
take the error line and for that we have
as well a function so it's going to be
the error
line like this and we have to cast
it because it is as well a number and as
well what is really important is the
name of the stored procedure. So error
procedure and we have a function for
that error procedure like this. It's
going to be a string. So that's why I
don't have to cast it. So now with that
we have defined for SQL what to do if
there is like an error in our code. So
let's go and execute the whole thing.
And now let's go and execute our stored
procedure. So let's go and do that. So
now as you can see in the output we are
not getting any results and it is not
giving an error. But if you go to the
messages, you will see a very nice
message. So it says an error is
occurred. The error message is divided
by zero and we have the error number in
which line and as well the stored
procedure name. So as you can see it's
amazing. This is how we use the try and
catch in order to have more options on
to control what can happen if there is
an
error. Now the next step what I'm going
to do, we have to go and organize our
store procedure. As you can see,
everything is getting bigger. So now
what we usually do, we use tab in order
to make spaces between each section. So
now the first section is between the
first begin and the last end. So we have
to go and mark everything and hit once a
tab. So now it is easier to read. Now
the whole thing is our codes. So now the
next level is the block of the try. So
the whole thing over here is the try. So
let's go and do that. I'm just going to
mark everything until here and then hit
tab. So now we can see it better, right?
And the same thing for the catch. I
think I have already done that. So it's
already pushed. Now we go to the next
level. So between this begin and end,
everything is pushed. So this looks
nice. The same thing over here. It's
pushed as well. And then we don't have
here any begin and end. So it looks
okay. And the same thing over here. So
all our begin and end is now sorted
correctly. Now the next step is that we
can go and improve the comments a little
bit. So we can split our code into
multiple sections. So what we're going
to do, we're going to go over here and
say this is step one. And what I like to
do is to go and add separation using the
equals or any special character that you
like and as well here. So with that we
have the first step. We are preparing
the data. And then let's go and copy the
whole thing and go over here and say
this is the step two. And we're going to
say this is
generating summary reports and something
like this. And of course below that we
can say what is this report about. So
calculate total
customers and average score for
specific country. And as well we can go
over here and add as well a comment.
calculate total number of orders and
total sales for specific country. And of
course we have to go and remove this
error over here otherwise we'll get an
error and we can go and add something
about the catch where we can say like
this again few
comments we're going to say error
handling. So let's go and execute it
again in order to make sure we have the
newest version. And with that we are
done. We have a really nice stored
procedure with multiple steps and we
have it professional where we have error
handling inside it and everything looks
well organized and easy to read. So this
is how we build stored procedures. All
right my friends. So that's all about
the store procedures. That was an
amazing feature in SQL to add
programmability in SQL. Now in the next
step we're going to cover quickly the
topic of the triggers. So let's
go. All right. So previously we have
understood that we can put all our SQL
statements in one stored procedure and
you have to go and manually execute the
store procedure. So that means in order
to trigger the start procedure, you have
manually to execute it and this is of
course a problem. How about to do that
automatically? So triggers in SQL they
are special stored procedure that
automatically runs or let's say fired in
response to a specific event that
happens on a table. So what this exactly
means? So now let's say that we have a
table in our database and now something
could happen to this table like
inserting data, deleting, updating data,
all those stuff that is happening we
call them events. And now what we can do
we can go and attach like a trigger on
top of this table and each time an event
happened like insert update delete
something else going to be triggered
like maybe going and inserting data
somewhere else in another table or doing
a check whether we are allowed to delete
the data in the first place or maybe
sending a warning message or something.
So based on any changes to the table we
can trigger another events and we can do
that using the SQL triggers and for the
SQL triggers we have like multiple types
like the DML triggers and this type of
trigger going to respond once we have
like insert update delete statements.
Another type of triggers we have the DDL
triggers like you can make a trigger to
respond to any schema changes like
creating altering or dropping a table or
even view by the way not only tables.
And the third type of triggers we have
the login trigger. So the trigger can
respond to login events. Now in this
tutorial we're going to focus on the DML
triggers the insert update delete. And
for the DML triggers we have two types.
We have after triggers and as well we
have instead of triggers. So as the name
suggest if you use after so it can be
executed after the event and the other
type that instead of it's something that
cannot wait until everything happens. So
this time the trigger going to be
executed during the event not after it.
So now in order to understand all of
this we're going to have really nice use
case. And now the use case is about
maintaining an audit logs. So what we
mean with that? Let's have for example
the table employees. The employee data
are usually very sensitive informations
because there we can see which employees
are added, the salary updates, the
employee terminations and this makes the
table very important because we would
like to track all those changes that is
happening to this table. So each time we
are inserting, updating, deleting, we
would like to maintain a log about all
those changes in order to analyze it
later. It is of course very important
such a logs for the compliance and the
auditors and in case there is like a
problem we can go to the logs to
understand when this happened who made
the changes and what exactly changed and
now in order to maintain logs we're
going to use the power of triggers. So
what we're going to do we're going to go
and attach like a trigger on the table
employees and each time we insert new
data to the employees we are triggering
another events. So what can happen this
new employee going to be inserted in the
audit logs in order to have a record
about this activity in the logs. So that
means each time you are inserting data
to the table employees you are
automatically inserting data inside the
logs and this is really amazing use case
for the triggers. So let's go and
implement it. Okay. So now let's check
quickly the syntax of the triggers. So
we start with the usuals create trigger
then the trigger name and then we have
to specify on which table this trigger
going to be built in. So now we are
attaching like a trigger on top of one
table and after that we have to define
for SQL when this trigger going to
happen. So what is actually triggering
the trigger and here you can define
after or instead then you have to define
the operator. So first you have to
define like after or instead of and then
we have to define the operation. So
insert, update, delete or one of them.
And with that you are telling SQL when
exactly this should happen. And now
after that we have to tell SQL what
going to happen if the trigger is
triggered. So here we have like begin
and end. And then we have like several
skill statements that's going to
describe what's going to happen once we
have the trigger. So that's it. As you
can see the syntax is very simple. Okay.
So now let's do it step by step. First I
would like to create a table where we're
going to store the logs information. So
it's going to be very simple table.
We're going to say create table. Then
we're going to call it sales employee
logs and we're going to have the
following columns inside it. So let's
start with the primary key. It's going
to be the log ID and the data type int
and then we're going to have like a
sequence. So we're going to have
identity and this is the primary key.
Let's go to the next one. It's going to
be the employee ID and the data type
going to be ins. The next one is going
to be the log message. So let's have it
as a vchar and I'm going to have it like
255 and then to the next one we're going
to have the lock dates and then we're
going to have like let's say a date or a
date time. So that's it. Let's go and
execute it and with that we have a new
table inside our database. Now the next
step is that we're going to go and
create our trigger. So we're going to
say create trigger and I'm going to call
it like this trg. This is just a prefix
to indicate this is a trigger. And I'm
just going to call it after insert
employee. And now we have to define the
table. So it's going to be on sales
employee. So now with that we are saying
we have now a trigger on the table
employees. And now we have to define the
logic. So we're going to use after
insert. So that means after we insert
any record to the table employees the
following things should happen. So we're
going to say as and then begin and end
and in between we can have our logic. So
what can happen after a new record is
inserted to the employees. We're going
to go and insert a new record to the
employee logs. So we're going to have
insert into sales employee
logs and we're going to have here the
three columns employee
ID the log
message and the log dates. So now which
value is going to be inserted? it going
to be like from a query. So we're going
to say select and we're going to say as
well employee ID and for the log message
we can have customized one like let's
say new employee added and it's going to
be equal to the employee ID. So in order
to have the employee ID it's going to be
like
this. So that's it. Now to the next one
we need the log date. It's going to be
get date. And now you might say okay but
where this employee ID is coming from?
Well, it going to come from the table
from inserted. So what is actually
inserted? It is like special virtual
table that holds all the new inserted
data to our table employees. So anything
we are inserting inside the employees
will be available inside this table. And
of course this is only available during
the execution of this trigger. So you
cannot go now outside of this query and
start querying the table inserted
because you will not find anything. This
is only like a virtual table that
contains anything that you are doing to
the table employees and you find a lot
of informations like the salary, the age
and so on. So that's it for the
inserted. Now we have to make sure that
in our message we have everything as a
string because the employee ID is an
integer. So we have to cast it. So cast
and then we're going to say as far char
like this otherwise we'll get an error.
So I think we have our trigger ready. We
have a new trigger on the table
employees. And now the first question is
when this trigger going to happen? Well
it can happen after inserting data to
the employees. And then the second
question what's going to happen? Well,
once we have this event, the whole thing
here going to be executed where we are
saying insert to the logs, the employee
ID, the message and as well the date
when this happens. And we can get all
those informations from the table, the
virtual table inserted. So I think we
are ready. Let's go and execute it. And
now if you go to the object explorer to
our database, let's go to our table
employees and then to the triggers. So
if you refresh over here you can see our
new trigger that we just created. So
with that we have to find our trigger
and we are ready. Now the next step is
that we're going to go and trigger our
trigger. So let's go and do that. Let's
have a new query. But first I'm going to
have a look to our
logs. So sales employee logs. So let's
query this one. And as you can see our
logs is empty because we didn't insert
anything to the table employees. Let's
go and do that. Let's trigger our
trigger. So what we're going to do,
we're going to say insert into sales
employees and we're going to have the
following values. So we are at the
counter, I think six. Let's have the
first name
Maria. The last name an then we're going
to have the position. It's going to be
the HR for example. The birth date,
let's pick something. I don't know. We
have a female
here. And the salary. Let's go and get
this salary and the hierarchy it can be
for example three. So let's go and
execute it. And with that as you can see
we have inserted a new data to the
employees. Let's check now the logs. So
let's query it. So we have here nice log
about the employee number six. And we
have here nice message and when this did
happen. Of course you can go and insert
another employee let's say seven with
the same data. So let's do that and
check the logs. And with that we have
another log for the new employee. So
this is really amazing use case in order
to maintain a log to your data and you
can go and make like some analyzes on
how many inserted happens and of course
not only on the insert you can have it
on the update delete. So as you can see
it is very simple. This is how we create
the triggers in SQL. All right my
friends. So that's all about the
triggers with that with with that we
have covered now with that we have
covered now all the concepts and topics
that you have to learn about SQL. Now in
the next chapter it's going to be about
the performance. So as you start writing
queries and so on you will start
noticing some queries are really slow.
Now what we're going to do in this
chapter we're going to learn different
techniques on how to optimize the
performance. And the first and the very
famous one is to go and build indexes in
databases. So let's understand what this
means. So what is an index? An index is
a data structure that provides a quick
access to the rows to improve the speed
of your queries. So an index is like a
guide for your database in order to
speed up the process of searching for
data especially if you have like big
tables. So now in order to understand
what are indexes, imagine you have huge
book and you want to find a specific
topic or a chapter. Instead of flipping
each single page in order to find the
topic that you are searching for, you
would use the index at the back of the
book in order to jump straight to the
right page. And that's exactly what
index does but for your data. Another
analogy that I use in order to
understand indexes is think about the
indexes as a big hotel. Now let's say
that in the hotel we don't have any
guide and you would like to find the
room number let's say 5001. Now what you
going to do? You're going to go and
search for your room floor by floor and
checking each room until you find your
room. But instead of that, thankfully
hotels have a numbering system. And you
can ask for a map from the reception in
order to understand in which building in
which floor you can find your room. So
by just following the map and maybe some
signs, it's going to be very quickly to
locate and find your room in such a big
hotel. And that's exactly what each
database needs. It needs an index in
order to help the database finding and
locating the right data without having
to scan
everything. And now let's say that you
ask me, you know what, I have this big
table and I would like to speed up the
queries using indexes. And my first
question going to be, what are you
exactly doing with this table? Are you
using this table to search for text or
are you doing like complex analyszis
with this table? And the reason why I'm
asking this is that we have different
indexes in databases for different
purposes. So now let's have a quick look
to the different types of indexes that
we have in database. I divide the
indexes in databases into three
categories. The first one is by the
structure how the database is organizing
and referencing the data. And here we
have two types. The clustered index and
the non-clustered index. Those are very
important to understand. Now we have
another category for the indexes. We can
divide them by the storage. And in this
category we are talking about how the
data is stored physically in the
database. So we have two types. We have
the row store index and the column store
index. And the third type is the
functions and here we have two types. We
have the unique index and the filtered
index. Now each index type has its own
strings but as well there is always a
tradeoff. Some might improve their read
performance. The other one might improve
the insert and update operations. So
it's all about choosing the right type
of index for the job. So now what we're
going to do, we're going to go and deep
dive into each of those types in order
to understand how they work and how we
can create them. And we will start with
the first category, the structure. We
have the clustered index and the
nclustered index.
Now before we dive into how the indexes
works in databases, let's understand
first what happens to the database
tables if you don't use any index. When
you create a new table in your database
like for example the customers table
where you have let's say 20 customers
inside this table. What you're going to
see at the client side is like
spreadsheets like a table with rows and
columns but behind the scenes the
database store it a bit differently.
It's going to store the data in a data
file on the disk and inside this file
the data can be stored inside blocks
called pages. So it's not like rows and
columns that are stored inside data
files and inside the data files we have
pages. So what is a page? A page is the
unit of data storage in a database and
it is a fixed size of 8 kilobyt where
the SQL database can store anything
inside it. It can store inside it the
rows of your tables or columns metadata
indexes and every time you are
interacting with your data the SQL is
reading and writing to those pages. So
as you can see the SQL is not storing
the data inside like rows and columns.
So if you are running a query the SQL is
not like selecting a specific column it
always fetch a data page in order to
read the rows inside this page. And the
main two types that we're going to learn
is the data page and the index page. So
how the data page looks like it is
divided into multiple sections. The
first section is the page header where
the database can store key informations
about the metadata like the page ID and
it has the following format. It start
with the file ID like one and then we
have a unique number for each page. So
for example 150. So the page header is a
fixed size of 96 bytes. Now to the next
section, we're going to have a variable
size. This is where your data row is
going to be stored. So your actual data
and row is going to be stored in this
section. And the SQL going to try and
fits as many rows as it can in one
single page. And this of course depends
on the size of each row. So if you have
like a large table where the rows are
really big, so SQL can fit only few rows
in one single page. And now moving on to
the last section in the data page, we
have the offset array. This is like a
quick index for the rows stored inside
this page. It keeps track of where each
rows begins so that the SQL can easily
locate a specific row without having SQL
like scanning the entire page in order
to find a row. So this is the structure
of the data page and this is exactly how
the SQL stores data inside the
databases. So now back to our example
where we have the customers table and 20
rows. So let's see how SQL going to be
creating those pages. Now if you are not
using any index in this table. So now
what going to happen? SQL going to
insert the data inside those pages as
you are inserting the data inside the
customers. So maybe first you are
inserting the customers like 12 5 6 7
and SQL going to insert it to the data
pages exactly like that. So that means
SQL is just inserting the data as you
insert it to the table. So let's say
each data page is like fitting only five
rows. So after we insert five customers,
SQL going to go and create another data
page for the next rows. So in the next
page, the SQL going to insert the next
five customers. And once it's full, it's
going to create another data page in
order to start adding the next customer
until we have like for example four
pages for that 20 customers. So now if
you check the customers inside those
four pages you see that they are not
sorted at all and that's because in this
scenario we are not using any index. So
we call this structure as a heap
structure. So a heap table is a table
without a clustered index. That means
the rows are stored randomly without any
particular order. This is not a really
bad because it's going to be very quick
to insert data inside this table. But of
course finding something from this table
going to be very slow. So this is the
first tradeoff. You have a very fast
writes but a very bad reads. Think about
it like you are throwing all your papers
in a drawer without organizing them. So
you can toss things very quickly in this
drawer. But if you want to search for
specific paper later, it's going to be
very long process until you find it
because nothing's in order. So now let's
see how the SQL going to handle if you
read something from this table. Let's
say that you are searching for the
customer with the ID 14. So now SQL has
totally no idea where to find this
customer. So SQL going to start fetching
each data page and start scanning each
row. So it's going to start with the
first data page and start scanning.
Well, SQL will not find 14 here. So SQL
going to go to the next page and start
scanning as well. Searching for the ID
14 and nothing going to be found. The
same thing for the third page as well.
SQL will not find 14. So SQL going to go
to the last data page and there after
scanning four rows in this data page
finally SQL going to find the customer
number 14 and it's going to return it
for the clients. So as you can see in
order to find one customer SQL did read
four different pages and scanned like 19
rows in order to find the customer and
this process we call it full table scan.
So the full table scans means SQL is
scanning the entire table page by page
and row by row in order to find specific
row. And of course for this table maybe
it's not a big deal. But if you have
like a big table where you have like
hundred of thousands or maybe millions
of rows searching through the heap
structure going to be very painful and
slow in order to locate one row. And
here exactly why we need indexes in SQL
databases. So let's understand the first
type of indexes the clustered
index. All right. So now let's
understand what can happen if you create
clustered index in your table. So say
you create a clustered index on the ID
column of the customers. So the first
thing that's going to happen SQL going
to physically sort all the data based on
the column ID. So the rows going to
rearranged in each data page from the
lowest to the highest. So in the first
page we're going to have the first
customer ID number one then 2 3 4 5
until we reach in the last page the last
customer number 20. So as you can see
the first page has the lowest value and
the last page has the highest value. So
that's not all. The next step is that
SQL going to go and start structuring
and building the B tree. So what is a B
tree? A B tree short for balance tree.
It is hierarchal structure that store
the data as a tree upside
[Music]
down. It start with the root the root
node and then it keep branching out
until we reach eventually the leaves.
Between the leaf nodes and the root
nodes we call this section the
intermediate nodes. So it could be like
one level or multiple levels between the
root and the leaves. And once SQL
construct the B tree, it's going to be
very easy for SQL to navigate through
the B tree in order to find specific
information. So let's see how SQL is
building the B tree for the clustered
index. Now very important to understand
that the leaves the leaf nodes and the B
tree for the clustered index contain the
actual data the data pages. So all your
nice sorted data pages and your data is
stored at the leaf level. Then after
that SQL going to start building the
intermediate nodes and here the database
going to use different type of pages. We
have the index page. So in the index
page we cannot find the actual data the
entire rows but instead the index page
stores a key value that contain a
pointer to another index page or to a
data page. So for example we have here
the value one the key and then the value
going to be the ID of the data page. So
here we don't have like the whole row
about the data we have here only a
pointer to another data page. So here we
are telling the scale if you are
searching for ids between 1 and five you
can locate it at the data page ID
1.100 and then we can store in this
index page another pointer where we can
tell SQL if you are searching between 6
and 10 then you can locate it at the
second data page. So this is the
structure of the index page it contains
only pointers to another page and the
same thing for the second two pages. The
SQL going to create another index page
where it's going to says if you are
searching for IDs between 11 and 15, you
can find it at the third page 1 double
point 10002. And for the last group
between 16 and 20, we have another
pointer to the last page to the page
number
one3. So as you can see inside those
index pages, we have like a pointer for
each group of ids for each cluster. So
for the group of customers between 1 and
five we have one pointer and for the
second group between six and 10 we have
another pointer. So that means we don't
have here a pointer for each row. We
have a pointer for each group for each
cluster. That's why we call it clustered
index. And now once SQL is done building
the intermediate nodes, SQL going to go
and build the last node, the root node
where it says if you are searching for
customers between 1 and 10, then go to
the index page with the ID
1.200. So that means the route node here
is pointing to another index page, not
directly to the data page. And the same
thing, we need another pointer for the
second index page. So the customers
between 11 and 20 go to the index page
with the ID
1.201 and this is exactly what going to
happen if you create a clustered index
in SQL. First it going to go and
physically sort all your data in the
databases. So if it's from the first
time sorted randomly SQL has to arrange
everything and sort the data from the
scratch. And then it's going to go and
build this structure where you have in
the root node and index page in the
intermediate nodes the index pages but
at the leaf level at the leaves we have
the actual data the data pages. So now
let's see what going to happen if you
query the table where you search for the
ID number 14. So it's going to check
which pointer to use since 14 is in the
group between 11 and 20. It's going to
go and use the second pointer to the
index page with the ID one double point
2011. And here the SQL going to open
this index page and check the pointers.
So since 14 is between 11 and 15 it
going to go and use the pointer to the
data page one point 102 and with that
SQL located the correct data page the
third page and now SQL going to open
this data page and find the customer ID
number 14. So as you can see it was very
fast for SQL to locate the correct data
page with only three jumps from the root
node to the intermediate node. The SQL
were able to find fast the correct data
page. And here SQL needs only to read
one data page instead of reading as we
saw in the heap structure four different
data pages. And of course you might say
but still here we are reading like three
pages. Well, reading an index page is
very fast compared to the data page
because reading a data page is always
slower than reading an index page. So,
as you can see, this P3 structure, the
clustered index structure did help the
SQL and the database to locate the right
data in the right
[Music]
databases. And this is exactly how that
clustered index works in the SQL
database.
All right. So now we're going to move to
the second type and we're going to
understand how exactly SQL build and
create the nonclustered index. So let's
go. So now we are back to the heap
structure where our table don't have any
index and our data are stored randomly
inside the data pages. And now if you go
and create a non-clustered index on the
customer ID, what can happen? And here's
the big difference that SQL will not
touch or change anything on the physical
actual data on the databases. So the
database is going to stay as it is and
nothing going to be changed and the SQL
start immediately building the B
structure. So it's going to start
immediately building an index page and
this index page is a little bit
different than the one that we have
learned previously. So since it's index
page, it's going to store pointers. But
this time SQL going to store in the key
the customer ID. So one is the customer
ID and now the value the pointer it will
not be the data page ID. We will be more
specific. So we're going to have like an
address where exactly the row is stored.
So it's going to start with the file ID,
the page number because the customer ID
one is stored in the page
one2. But SQL gonna go add as well the
offset number of the row where exactly
in the page we can find this ID and the
whole thing we can call it an air ID the
row identifier. So now let's see quickly
how the index page is pointing exactly
to the row inside the data page. So the
first part of the row identifier is
mapping to the data page ID and then
from the 96 it's going to take us to the
offset and that's exactly the location
of the row number one. So 96 is the part
where we're going to start finding the
row number one and that's going to takes
us exactly to the place where we can
read the information about the row ID
number one. So this is how the index
page is locating the exact place of the
rows. So SQL going to go and continue
and assign for each customer ID a
pointer to the exact location. So as you
can see now in the index page we don't
have like a pointer for each group of
customers like we have learned in the
clusters index. We have now a pointer
for each ID and this type of index page
we call it roator page. So now SQL going
to go and continue and map a pointer for
each customer ID that we have inside our
table. So we will have multiple index
pages pointing to our data page. So as
you can see we have a lot of pointers
and the data inside the index page is of
course sorted but inside the data pages
it left as it is. And now those index
pages that has the row identifier going
to be stored at the leaf level of the B
tree. So at the leaf level we don't have
the actual data the data pages we have
index pages where we have pointers then
to the actual data and then it's going
to go and start building the
intermediate nodes. It's exactly like
the clustered index where it's going to
point to another index page. So between
one and five customers it's going to be
in the index page number 200. So the
next step is going to go and build the
intermediate nodes. It's going to be
exactly like the clustered index.
Nothing going to be changed. is like the
same structure. So it is an index page
pointing to another index page but this
time for a group of customers and then
we're going to have as well the root
node. So again we call this structure as
a B tree structure where they point to
another databases but the databases are
not part of the B tree. So now let's say
if we are searching for the customer ID
number 14, what's going to happen? It's
going to start again from the root node
and then it's going to find the pointer
to the intermediate node and then jump
to the next step to the intermediate
node and then it's going to find the
pointer to the index page between 11 and
15 and then it's going to go and scan
this index page and find okay for the
customer ID number 14 we have the
following address. So it's going to go
and locate the exact database and as
well the exact place of the row. So it
can go and jump immediately to the row
without scanning anything else. So here
this time with the nclustered index the
SQL did read three different index
pages. And finally the one data page in
order to find the data. So if you
compare to the clustered index you can
see that we have here one extra layer
one extra index page to be scanned in
order to find the right place of the
row. And this is how SQL creates the B
tree for the nonclustered index and how
it scans it in order to find the
information. All right. So now when I
think about the clustered index and the
non-clustered index, I think about a
book. You can think of the clustered
index like the table of contents at the
front of the table. So the table of
contents kind of tells you where to find
each chapter and the chapters are
exactly sorted like the table of
contents and this is exactly what the
clustered index does. But now in the
other hand think about the nclustered
index as the index that you can find at
the end of the book. The index of the
book is a very detailed list of topics,
terms and keywords where it points
exactly to the location where you can
find it in the book. And the content and
the topic of the book is not sorted like
the index of the book. And this is
exactly what the noncluster index does.
It is coexisting with the data. It is an
extra list where it can point exactly
where we can find the data inside our
table. All right. Right. So now let's
put those two indexes side by side to
understand the differences between them.
So the structure of the cluster the
index is a B tree where it start with
the root node where we have an index
page. This index page is pointing to the
intermediate nodes where we have as well
index pages and those index pages are
pointing to the actual data to the data
pages. So at the leave level of the
clustered index we have the data pages
the actual data. What's special about
the clustered index is that it
physically sort the data inside those
pages. So everything here is physically
rearranged and sorted. Now if you are
talking about the nclustlustered index
we have as well a bit tree. So the same
thing at the root node we have an index
page pointing to an intermediate index
page but this time the intermediate
nodes are pointing to another index
page. They are not pointing like the
clustered index to a data page. they are
pointing to index page. So now if you
check this structure you can see that at
the leaf level for the clustered index
we have the actual data the data pages
but on the other side at the leaf level
for the nclustered index we don't have
the actual data we have index pages but
those index pages are pointing to the
actual data to the data pages but the
big difference of that the data pages
are not part of the B3 the B3 of the
nclustlustered index is just a separate
structure that does not involve any
data. So we have only index pages and it
just points to the data pages without
changing anything physically with your
data. But in reality what happen is that
you can have those two types of indexes
the clustered and the nclustered indexes
in one table. So one can happen the leaf
level of the nclustered index going to
be pointing to the data pages of the
clustered index because those index
pages don't care whether those pages are
sorted or not. It's just going to go and
point to the correct page and to the
correct row. So that means we have now
like two different B3 structures that
are pointing to the data. And here there
is like one thing that you have to
understand that that you can create only
one clustered index on a table. And this
rule really makes sense because you can
sort the data only in one way in SQL.
And that's of course makes sense because
you can sort the data physically only
once. And that's why in SQL databases
you are allowed to create only one
clustered index because physically the
data can be sorted only in one way. But
in the other hand in the non-clustered
index you can create as many
nonclustered index you need. So you can
create three four and all of them are
pointing to the same data pages because
in the B tree of the non-clustered index
you don't store any data pages. We store
only pointers to the data and you could
have like multiple pointers. So this is
the most important and the main
difference between those two indexes.
Now if you put it side by side, we have
learned that the clustered index going
to go and physically sorts and stores
the rows at the B tree. But the
nclustered index is going to go and
create a separate p structure with
pointers to the actual data. And by the
way, the clustered index we call it the
main index that we could use in each
table. So the clustered index is the
main one, the most important one that
you can go and use in each table in your
database. Now as we learned if you are
talking about the number of indexes you
can create maximum one index for each
table but for the nclustered index there
is no limitations you can go and create
multiple indexes for each table. And now
if you go and compare them about the
read performance how fast we can get
data using clustered index. Well it is
faster than the nclustlustered index.
And that's because in the nonclass and
index we have this extra layer at the
leaf node from the B tree and because of
this having extra layer that means SQL
has to do extra job in order to find the
data that's why clustered index is
faster than the nonclustered index but
now in the other hand if we are talking
about the right performance how fast we
can insert data to the tables well
writing data to a table with a clustered
index is slower than the nclustered
index. And that's because as you are
inserting data to the table, SQL has
always to check the databases is
everything sorted correctly and if not
SQL has to go and start physically
sorting the data again in order to have
the correct order. So there is a lot of
stress in order to sort the data with
the clustered index. But in the other
hand in the non-clustered index we don't
have this. So the physical data going to
stay as it is. We are just creating nice
new pointers. So if you are writing to a
table where you have a clustered index,
it's going to be slower than writing to
a table where you have nclustered index.
And of course the fastest way to write
data to a table is to not have indexes
at all. So a heap structure. So SQL just
go and start inserting data inside those
databases without creating any extra
structures. So as you can see it's like
always a tradeoff. You can read fast but
you're going to write slower. So you
cannot have like everything. Now we are
talking about the storage efficiency.
The clustered index going to be better
with the storage than the nonclustered
index and that's because of the same
reason with the nonstructured index. We
have this extra layer of index pages and
index pages needs storage and that's why
they can waste more storage than the
clustered index. Now if you're talking
about the use cases when to use
clustered index. Well, if you have like
a column this column has to have few
criteria in order to be good candidate
for the clustered index. First, it's
going to be good if the values inside
the columns are unique. And second, and
it is way more important than that, the
values of this column should not change
a lot because if this column having a
lot of update operators and the data is
keep changing, that means each time SQL
going to go and start sorting the data
again left and right. So having a column
that is frequently changing, it's not
good for clustered index. And that's why
the primary keys of tables are a perfect
candidate because first they are unique
and second we will never go and update a
primary key value. We always append a
new primary key value and that's why
primary keys are perfect for clustered
index. And one more thing where I go and
use clustered index is that to optimize
the performance of a range query. If you
are quering the data between one value
and another one clusters index works
really well. Now in the other hand if we
are talking about the non-clustered
index we could use it on coms that are
used in the search conditions or if you
are joining tables without using the
primary keys then you can go and apply
the nclustered index in order to have
faster joins or you can go and use it to
optimize the performance if you are
searching for an exact value exact
match. So those are the main and
important differences between the
clustered and the nclustered indexes.
All right. So now before we go to SQL
and start practicing, I would like to
show you the syntax of the index. So
it's very very simple. It start with
create and then we can define whether it
is clustered or nonclustered and then
the keyword index. But this section is
optional. So if you don't define
anything, the default going to be the
nonclustered. So if you say create index
the SQL server going to go and create
nclustered index. Then after that we
have to go and define the name of the
index and then we have to tell SQL which
table we have to create the index in on
table name and then we can go and define
one column or multiple columns for the
index and we call an index with multiple
columns as composite index. So for
example we can go and create a clustered
index using this command create
clustered index the index name and then
we specify the table and the ID. So we
are saying create clustered index based
on this column the ID from the table
customers. And if you want to create a
nclustered index you say create
nclustered index and the same thing. So
so far we are using one column in the
index but we can go and create a
composite index with multiple columns
like the following example. So we can
say create an index and as you can see
we skipped here defining the type and
that's because the default going to be
nonclustered index. And now here we are
specifying two columns the last name and
the first name. And as you can see we
specifying as well for SQL how to sort
the data. So we are saying last name
should be sorted inside the data page
ascending lowest to the highest but the
first name should be the way around from
the highest to the lowest. So you can
control how the data going to be sorted
physically in the data page. So as you
can see it is very simple. This is the
syntax for creating index in SQL. All
right. So back to SQL and the first
question is where do we find indexes in
the database? Well you can go and
explore it. If you go to the object
explorer over here and check any tables
from our sales DB for example the
customers and here you have a folder
called indexes. So if you expand it you
will find here an index. I didn't create
any of those indexes in the database.
But in SQL server, if you define any of
the columns as a primary key, the SQL
server going to go by default creating a
clustered index for the primary key
because it makes always sense to create
a clustered index on the primary key. So
this one is created as a default and as
you can see at the start we have like a
key primary key customer and then it is
clustered. Now I would like to start
from the scratch. That's why I would
like to go and create a new table
without any indexes. So what we're going
to do, we're going to go and load the
table customers into a new table. So how
we going to do that? We're going to go
and say select star from sales
customers and before the from we're
going to say into a new table. So it's
going to be TB customers. So like this.
Let's go ahead and execute it. So now if
you go to the left side and refresh the
tables you can find we have now a new
table called DB customers. Now let's go
and check whether we have any indexes
inside it. So indexes it is empty. So we
don't have anything no clustered index
or anything else. And this table has the
structure of heap structure. So the data
are inserted there randomly. It is not
sorted. And if I go over here and for
example, let's say I'm going to select
from this new
table where customer ID equal one and I
execute it. The SQL server did a full
scan on the table in order to find this
customer ID. So our new table DB
customers is heap cluster. But let's go
and change that. What we're going to do,
we're going to go and create a new
clustered index. So we're going to say
create
clustered index and then we're going to
go and give it a name for the index. We
usually follow the following index. So
we have index as prefix and then after
that we specify the table name. So DB
customers and then the key for the
index. So the column that we are using
in order to index the table. This is
important to stick with the same naming
convention for the index name because
later as you are monitoring your
indexes, it's going to be really easy to
understand. Okay, this index is for the
table DB customers and we are using the
customer ID to index. So now after that
we're going to go specify on which table
we are doing the index. So on sales DB
customers and then we're going to
specify the column name. So we are
saying build for me a clustered index
based on the customer ID. So now let's
go and execute it. So as you can see
it's very fast because we have only five
rows. So the database just switched all
the data pages very fast. Now let's go
and check our new index. So let's go and
refresh and let's go inside it. And now
we can see that we have our new index
clustered index based on the customer
ID. Now as we learned we cannot create
multiple clustered index. But let's go
and test that. So I will just take the
whole thing and let's say I would like
to create a class index based on the
first
name as well
here. So let's go and execute it. So as
you can see saying you cannot create
more than one clustered index on this
table. That means we can create only one
clustered index. And let's say that
after you created the index you chose
the wrong column and you would like to
change it to the first name. So what
we're going to do, we have to go and
drop the index. So we say drop index and
then you need the index name. It was
this one. And then you have to specify
which table. So it's going to be sales
DB
customers like this. So if I do it like
this and let's go and refresh again. You
can see that we don't have any indexes
anymore and the table is packed as a hip
structure. And now you can go and create
the correct clustered index for this
table. But to be honest, I'm going to
stick with the customer ID. So I will
not create a clustered index on the
first name because the first name of
course is not unique. You can have like
maybe multiple customers having the same
name. And as well updates could happen
on the first name and that's going to be
very expensive. So that means I'm going
to stick with my index on the customer
ID. Let's go and execute it. And now I
have again my index on my table. Now
let's say that that I have the following
select statements from our tables. So
customers and I'm searching for the last
name where let's say we are searching
for brown. So let's go and execute it.
So let's say that we are getting more
and more customers and our table is
getting bigger and I frequently use this
query. So I'm searching for specific
customers using the last name. So what
we can do, we can go and create a
nonclustered index for the last name in
order to improve the performance of this
query. So let's go and create that. So
we're going to say create
nonclustered index. And now we're going
to give it the name using the naming
convention. So DB customers and we're
going to use the last name for this
index. So on
sales DB customers and we will use the
column last name for the index. So let's
go and execute it. And now if you go to
our indexes and refresh, we will find
our new index over here. And as you can
see, it says it is nonclustered and as
well non-unique. We will talk about the
uniqueness later. So as you can see,
it's very easy. We have just created a
uncclustered index on the last name. And
now as we learned, we can go and create
multiple nonclustered index on the same
table. Let's say for example, now we our
query looks like this. We are searching
for the first name using for example the
value Anna. And now this query happens a
lot and maybe slow. So we can go and
create new nonclustered index. So let me
just have it like this. And for the
nonclustered index you don't have to
specify always like nonclustered index.
As default it's going to be
nonclustered. So we can skip that. And
here let's call it first name. And the
column that we are using is the first
name. So let's go and create this index.
And now let's go and refresh our
indexes. And as you can see, SQL did
create a nonclustered index for the
first name. So if you don't specify the
type of the index, it's going to be as a
default nonclustered
index. All right. So now let's talk
about the composite index. It is an
index that has multiple columns inside
the same index. So far we have used only
one column in the index but we can go
and specify multiple columns and that's
because sometimes our wear conditions
are complicated and based on multiple
columns. So for example let's say that
we are searching for country equal to
USA and at the same time we are saying
the score should be higher than 500. So
that means in this condition we are
using two columns and we would like to
speed up this query. So how we going to
do it? So we're going to go and create
let's say an index and give it a name DB
customers and let's say country score on
sales DB customers. And now it is very
important to do the following thing. Now
we have to go and define a list of
columns that we want to be included in
this index. And it is very crucial and
important that you get the same order as
your query. So your query start with the
country and then the score. You have to
do it the same thing in the index. So
the first column it's going to be the
country and then the score. So it must
be the same order as your query. So
let's go and create this index. And if
you go to the indexes over here, you can
see that we have created our new index.
So now once you create such a index and
your table going to be like always
updating this index you have to be
committed and responsible. So in your
queries if you want to filter the data
using country and score always start
with the country then the score in order
to be able to use the index optimizer.
So if you do it like this the index
going to be working but if you go and
query the way around. So you start with
the score and then the country the SQL
will not be using your index. So either
you adjust your queries or you have to
go and recreate the index based on this
switch. So be very careful with the
composite indexes. The order is very
crucial. So you're going to have it
exactly like the query. And now you
might say you know what now we have like
a nice index for those two columns. What
going to happen if I go and use in my
query only one of them like for example
the country. So now the question is if I
go and execute this query is the SQL is
using this index even though that I
don't have the score. Well yes because
it follows the leftmost prefix rule. So
this means SQL can use the index if you
are using always the lift columns. So
here in our index country is on the left
that's why it is working over here. But
if you go and skip the lift column it
will not work. So if you go over here
for example and say let's go and select
only the
score and it is like higher than 500.
What we have done, we have skipped the
country in this query and that's why it
will not be working. So as long as you
are including the left columns, it will
work even though it is only one column.
So in this scenario, the first query
going to use the index, the second one
will not be using it. So now let me give
you a very simple example in order to
understand how this works. So let's say
that we have an index using four columns
A, B, C, D. Now in your query if you go
and target the column A the index going
to be used. Now the same thing going to
happen if you go and use A and P. So if
you're using those two columns you will
be using the index. So those are where
the index will be used. So now let's
have the scenarios where the index wants
be used. So for example if you go and
just jump immediately to the column B.
So you are not using the left column the
A that's why you will not be using the
index and as well in your query if you
are using A and you are skipping the P.
So you have A and then C you will not be
using the index. So you have always to
use always the lift columns. So here if
you are using A B C you will be using
the index. And let's see here you are
using A B and then you jump and skip to
the D you will not be using the index.
So this is what we mean with the
leftmost prefix rule by using the
composite index. So if you're using
multiple columns inside one index, be
careful with the order of the columns
that you are defining. All right. So
that's all for this category, clustered
and uncclustered index. Now we're going
to move to the second category where we
talk about the indexes by the storage,
the row store and the column store.
So now let's say that we have a table we
have multiple rows and multiple columns.
Now if we use a row store index this is
the classical one. What going to happen?
Our table going to be splitted into
multiple rows. And as we learned each
group of rows going to be stored inside
a data page. So that means we are
organizing the data row by row which
means all the columns for each row going
to be stored together. This is the
traditional way on how the databases
organize their data where the
informations are stored row by row. But
now in the other side if you use column
store index the SQL going to go and
split your table into multiple separate
columns and then SQL going to go and
store the values of one column together
in data page. So that means if you go
and open a data page you will find only
the values of one column. You will not
find the entire row. So if it's like the
first name you will see only the first
name informations you will not see the
last name information in this data page.
So if you compare them the row store
index stores the data row by row the
column store index stores the data
column by column. So this is a very high
level representation on how the column
store index is stored. As you know me we
go in details in order to understand
exactly how SQL works with the column
store index. So let's go.
All right. So now let's say that we have
a table for the customers. We have three
columns ID, name and status. And as well
we have around 2 million rows, 2 million
customers. And as we learned as a
default, the table going to be built as
a heap structure where the rows are
stored row by row inside data pages. But
now we go and create a column store
index on top of this table. So now once
you do that SQL going to go through a
process in order to build the column
store. So the first step is SQL going to
go and divide the data the rows into row
groups. Now in SQL server each row group
can contain around like 1 million row.
So in this example our table going to be
splitted into two row groups. The first
one million row in one group and the
second one in another row group. Now you
might ask me we are talking about
columns. Why we are splitting the rows?
Well, this is just a pre-step in order
just to optimize the performance and to
do parallel processing. And of course,
the data will not be stored like this
because we have the second step. Now, in
the next step, SQL going to go and
segment the columns. So now, SQL will go
for each row group and start splitting
the data by the columns. And that's why
we call it a column store because we are
separating the columns from each others.
So that means we have one segment for
the ID, another one for the name and a
third one for the status. And this can
happen for each row group. And now it's
going to move to the third step in this
process. We have the data compression.
And this is the most important step in
this process because it is the reason
why column store is very fast compared
to the ro store. So in this process
there are like different techniques on
how to do data compression and the most
famous one is that it's going to go and
create like a dictionary. Let's take for
example the column status the status of
the customer whether it is active or
inactive. So the word active and
inactive going to be repeated like 2
million times because we have 2 million
customers and since it is like string it
is like taking a lot of space and
storage. But now instead of that we're
going to go and compress the data. So
first it's going to go and create a
dictionary by replacing the value active
and inactive into smaller values like
one and two. So we have like a mapping
between the long value to a small value.
And after that SQL going to store like a
data stream where we have like only two
values one two one two. So we're going
to have like a big stream of 2 million
rows. So it's going to go and do this
for each column and with that the size
of each column going to be changed
depends of course on how much different
values you have in each column. So this
step is very important in order to
reduce the size of the data and as well
to increase the performance. So now once
everything is organized and compressed,
SQL going to go and start storing the
results in databases. But TSQL will not
use the standard databases that we have
learned previously. But instead going to
use a special database called LOB large
object page. So now let's quickly
compare the structure of the normal
database that we have learned in the row
store with the new one, the column
store, the LOB data page. So as usual
each page has a header. This is same as
any data page. But the next section is
going to be the segment header. It has
like metadata informations about the
column segment that is stored in this
page. Like we have the segment ID, the
row group ID, the column ID and it has
as well very important information the
ID to the dictionary page. So the
dictionary page is as well a type of
pages in SQL. It has as well a header
but inside it we have like a mapping. So
it maps the original value, the long
one, the inactive to the smaller version
of this value, for example, one. And
that's all for the dictionary page. It
has the mapping between the original
values and the smaller values. And
beneath the segment header, we can have
now the important place where our data
can be stored. We have the data stream.
So it is like sequence of ids from the
dictionary that represents the values of
the columns side by side. And of course,
we cannot fit the whole 1 million rows
inside this data stream. We're going to
have like multiple LOP databases. So
this is how exactly the SQL stores your
data. If you decided to go with the
column store, so let's go back to the
process. So back to the process. As you
can see, SQL is storing the data as LO
data storage. So this is the last step
and with that SQL did convert your table
into a column store. So now we cannot
just create a column store without
defining whether it is clustered index
or non-clustered index. So let's start
with the first one the clustered column
store index. So if you create such a
index SQL of course will not be building
a B3 structure. SQL going to use exactly
this structure the column store
structure. So as we learned the cluster
index is a complete makeover of your
table. when you apply it then SQL going
to format everything column-wise and it
is fully replacing the old row based
table structure that we have at the
start. So once you apply the clustered
column store index it will not leave
anything behind and your table going to
be completely structured as a column
store and one more thing which is makes
sense of course all the columns from the
original table going to be converted to
a column store. So it is not leaving
anything behind it. But in the other
hand, if you are using non-clustered
column store index, as we learned, it is
like a companion to your existing table.
So it coexist with the table and it will
not replace anything. So the column
store index can be an additional thing
that is stored beside your table. So
that means the original table will not
be deleted at all like the clustered
column store index. The first one is in
the old row based storage. the regular
table, the first one, and your data
going to be as well stored in a separate
structure in the column store index. And
of course, in the non-clustered column
store index, since we are creating an
extra index outside of your original
table, you can go and define which
column should be included in this
process. It must not be all the columns.
You can go for example with only the
status. So that means you build a column
store index only for one column for the
status of the customers. So this is what
we mean with the clustered column store
index and the nclustered column store
index. All right friends, so now you
might ask me why we are doing all those
stuff. Why I would split my data by the
columns? Well, it's all because of
analytics. Because in analytics we have
like big complex query where we have a
lot of data aggregations and stuff on
big tables. And the roster index is
perfectly designed in order to improve
the performance of such big queries. And
that's why SQL databases like SQL server
and as well BI tools like Tableau and
PowerBI did adopt this methods in order
to offer fast platform for data
analyzes. So now let's understand
exactly why the column store index is
way faster for data analyzes than the
row store index. So let's go. So again
we have the customers tables and let's
say we have like five customers where we
have ID, name and status and as we
learned before if we are using roster
index the data can be stored in multiple
databases and in each database we're
going to have the whole record the whole
information about one customer. So for
this example we're going to have like
three databases but if you are using the
column store index it's going to be
stored little bit differently. So the
first column the id going to be stored
in one data page and here the SQL will
not go and build a dictionary because
the ids are already short. So we're
going to have like one data stream with
all ids and now for the next column name
is going to be stored in separate data
page where we're going to have an extra
dictionary page where each name going to
be mapped to one small value. So the
data going to be compressed and we're
going to save storage. Now the database
going to create for the third column the
status one more data page and the
dictionary here going to be very small.
So for active we're going to have one
and for the inactive we're going to have
two and in the data stream we will be
storing only the ids of the dictionary.
So now let's understand why the column
store is faster. Let's have the
following query. We want to find the
total number of customers that are
active. So we have the query select
count star from customers and we're
going to filter the data by the status
where it is equal to active. So now if
we query the table with the row store
what can happen? SQL have first to go
and collect the data. So it's going to
go to the first data page and collect
the first two customer then to the
second to the third and so on. And as
you can see SQL here is reading
everything the whole row the ID the name
the status even though that for the
query we actually we don't need all
those informations we just need to count
how many customers we need with the
status active but still cannot go and
selectively only reading the status has
to read the whole record. So after SQL
has all the data it's going to go and
filter the data. So it's going to go and
remove the inactive rows and then SQL
going to do the aggregate operation and
with that we're going to get three rows.
So that's why the total count of active
customers going to be three. But now
let's see how SQL going to query the
column store. So SQL first have to
analyze okay which columns do I need
actually for this query. Well, we need
only the status. So SQL will not go and
open all three data pages and read it.
SQL will target only one data page the
database where we have the column
status. So it's going to take this very
simple data stream and then it's going
to go and understand the dictionary and
it going to go and remove all the values
where it is equal to two. So without in
the output we have only three values and
SQL going to go and do a very quick
count for those values. So in the output
we will get as well three total number
of active customers. So now if you
compare this intermediate result sets
from the row store and the column store
you can see that in the row store we
have fetched and retrieved a lot of
unnecessary informations for this query
and this of course going to make the
speed of the query very slow but in the
column store reads exactly what it needs
for this aggregation and we didn't read
any extra informations about the names
of the customers the ids it didn't like
open any extra data pages it exactly
gets the data that it needs for the
aggregation and that's exactly why the
performance of queries where we have
aggregations and data analyzes is going
to be very fast if you are using column
store compared to the row store. So
that's why we use column store for big
data and data analytics. All right. So
now let's summarize the differences
between the row store and the column
store indexes side by side. So let's
start by the definition. The row store
going to go and organize and store the
data row by row. It is really nice
method if you need a lot of columns in
one row. But in the other hand, the
column store index going to go and store
the data and organize it column by
column which is really great if you're
focusing on specific column. Now if you
are talking about the storage
efficiency, the row store index going to
take more space compared to the column
store index and that's because as we
learned the column store going to go and
compress the data which going to save a
lot of storage if you have large tables.
Now to the next point which is more
important about the performance. The
read and write optimizations we can say
for the row store things are more
balanced. So you will get a decent speed
for both write and read operations but
things in the column store is different.
It is fast for reading especially if you
are doing data analytics but writing
data like inserting and updating it is
slower because as we learned there are
like multiple steps until the data is
written in the pages. So in one hand you
are optimizing the speed of your
analytical queries but in the other hand
changing data it is slower than the
roster index. Now let's talk about the
next point input and output efficiency.
Well the roster index it's not really
good because you are retrieving a lot of
columns. So a lot of data should be read
from the disk storage in order to answer
your queries. But in the other hand for
the column store it is lower and that's
because it targets exactly the data and
columns that is needed for the query. So
there will be generally less data that
is read from the disk storage and of
course that's why we are getting fast
read performance. So now if you are
thinking which systems are best for ro
store index well the roster index is
very suitable for the OLTB systems
online transactional systems like
banking and commerce systems where the
full records are accessed very
frequently but in the other hand the
column store index is great for OLAP.
All app systems are online analytical
processing where you have like data
warehouses, data league, business
intelligence. You are building reports
and analyzes. You have large data sets
and very complicated aggregated queries.
So if you have such a project then the
column store index is the way to go. So
that means the use case for the row
store index if you have high frequency
transactions where the system has to
quickly access records and the use case
for the column store is big data
analytics where the SQL has to scan
large data sets. So those are the main
differences between the row store index
and the column store
index. All right. So now let's check the
syntax of the column store index. Well,
it is really easy what we're going to
do. we can just put a column store
keyword between the clustered or
nonclustered and the index. So once you
specify that then you are telling SQL
you want to create a column store index
and the rest is going to stay as it is.
Now if you want to create row column
store then you don't have to specify
anything. There is no keyword for the
row store. So as we learned before we
can go and create a nonclustered index
and cluster on the index and both of
those syntax is going to tell SQL we are
creating row store index but if you go
and use the column store keyword then
you are telling SQL that you want to
create either clustered or nclustered
column store index and here there is
like a syntax rule if you are creating a
clustered column index then you must not
specify anything for the columns. So you
cannot go and specify anything like an
ID or country or any columns over here
because it makes no sense once you say
cluster column store then all the
columns going to be included in the new
structure. So this is the syntax of the
column store index. All right. So back
to scale let's check how we can create
column store index. Now if you check our
table here DB customers that we have
created previously and we go to the
indexes you can see that we have created
few indexes and one of them is the
clustered index. This one is a row store
index. So our table is splitted by the
rows. Now let's go and change that.
Let's make our table splitted by the
columns using the column store. So we're
going to say
create
clustered column store index and we're
going to give it the name index DB
customers and it's going to be on the
table sales DB customers and here if you
go and specify a column it's going to be
a mistake. So let's go and check that.
So if you go and execute it says it
fails because key lists or the columns
is not allowed. So we cannot have this.
So let's remove it. And now we have the
correct syntax. Let's execute it again.
We will get another error because it
says in one table you cannot have more
than one clustered index. We have
already one. You have to decide do you
want to split your table by columns or
by rows. That's why we have to go and
drop the previous index. So we're going
to do it like this. Drop index. And I
need the name of the index like this.
And then we have to specify the table
name. So that's it. Let's drop the
index. Now if you refresh, we cannot see
anymore our clustered index and our
query should be working. So let's do
that. Now let's check the indexes again.
And now as you can see, we got a new
clustered index, but this time it is
column store. Now you can see at the
start we have like an icon. This looks
like a bar chart or like analytics and
reports and that's because the main
purpose of creating com store is to have
a bar chart. So now of course we cannot
go and create multiple clustered column
index. We can have maximum only one. So
now if you say you know what let's go
and create for the first name another
index but this time it's going to be a
column store. So if I go and copy the
whole thing over here and let's say it
is none clustered column index and let's
call it for example first
name and we define over here the first
name. So that's it. Let's go and execute
it. You will see that we will get an
error where SQL tells us you cannot
create multiple column store indexes.
That means you can create only one
column store index for each table and
you have to decide whether it is a
clustered or non-clustered and you
cannot create like the row store
multiple non-clustered index. So you are
allowed only with one column store index
but this limitation is only here in the
SQL server. In other databases I know
that is allowed to use multiple column
store indexes like in the Azure SQL
server you can do that. So now in order
to practice and you would like to create
a nonclustered column store index, you
can drop the first one and you can go
and create the one that you need as a
nclustered index. So actually let's go
and do that. Let's drop the first one.
So drop index and this is our index on
this table. Let's do that. And once you
execute the nonclustered column store
index is going to work. And if you
refresh over here, you will see that we
have a non-clustered column store index
for the first name. Okay. So now as we
learned that the column store going to
go and compress the data and the storage
that is needed for the entire table
going to be less than the row store. So
let's see whether that is really true.
Now in order to check this I will not do
that in the database sales DB because
everything here is already small. We're
going to go and use another database. We
have the adventure works DW2022 and if
you have a newer version that's okay. So
now what is the plan? We're going to go
and create three identical copies of one
table and we're going to have different
structures. So the first one going to be
the heap structure. The second one going
to be row store structure and the third
one going to be column store structure
and then we're going to go and compare
the storage of those three. So now we
have to go and pick one of those tables.
We need one big table. So for example
the fact internet sales. So let's see
how we can do that. Let's start with the
heap structure. We're going to say
select star into a new table. So it's
going to be the
fact internet sales and underscore hp
for the heap. And we're going to get it
from the table fact internet sales. So
like this. And here it's very important
if you are switching databases you have
to go and use the database. So it's
going to be use adventure work DW 2022.
So execute this at the starts to make
sure that you are switching to the new
database. And now let's go and execute
our heap structure. So with that we have
created heap table as you can see 60,000
rows. And since we didn't define any
clustered index this table going to be
heap structure. Now let's go and create
another table where we use clustered row
store index. So what we're going to do,
we're going to copy the whole thing over
here and we're going to call this row
store and we're going to go of course
change the name to RS but still we are
targeting the same table. So let's go
and execute this at the start. But now
in order to make it as clustered row
store we have to go and create an index.
So it going to be like this create
clustered index. We don't have to
specify the row store because it is as a
default. It's going to be ro store. So
let's call it
index facts
internet sales RS and then the primary
key. So B key and now we need the
table fact internet sales RS and now we
need the columns the primary key well
actually I don't know what is the
primary key so let's go and check that
so it is a composite primary keys so
it's going to be the sales order number
and sales order line number like this.
So let's go and execute this. And with
that we have clustered row index. I'm
going to go and check what do we have
over here. So let's go and refresh
everything. So we have now two tables
the heap and the row store. So let's
extend it and check the indexes. And as
you can see we have the clustered index.
Now we need the third table. It's going
to be the column store index. I'm just
going to go and copy the whole thing
over here. So this is the column store
going to be here CS and CS and of course
we don't need any columns for the column
store and don't forget to add the column
store keyword. So create cluster column
store index and we have to rename as
well over here. So let's go and execute
our new stuff. So we create first the
table and then we convert it to a column
store index. So let's go and do that and
we have to go and refresh and check our
tables. So this is our third table and
let's go and check the indexes and we
have clustered column store. All right.
So now we are done. We have our three
different tables. Now let's go and check
the stoages of those three tables. So
now let's go and check our first table
the heap table. So right click on it and
go to the properties. And now we can see
here a lot of informations about our
table. But we are interested on the
storage. So click here on the page for
the storage. And now we can see here few
informations about the storage and one
of them is the data space. It is around
9 MB and the index space is almost
nothing. So we don't have anything over
here. So this is the storage of the heap
structure. We don't have any indexes.
Let's go now to the row store. So we're
going to go to the RS and properties.
Then let's go to the storage. And now as
you can see the data space is exactly
the same. And that's because whether it
is heap or row store index, we're going
to store the data in data pages as rows.
So the size of the data itself will not
change. It will be sorted differently.
But what changed here is the size of the
index. Now we are consuming more storage
for the index. So that means the overall
storage of the table with a cluster draw
store index it is more than the heap
structure. Let's go and check now our
column store index. So to the CS and
let's go to the properties. And now it
is interesting to see whether our table
is getting smaller. So let's go to the
storage. And as you can see the data
space is around 1 mgabyte compared to
the 9 mgabyte. I know those are small
numbers but still it is massively
reduced space because everything is
compressed and of course we are not
using any index spaces because we don't
have this B3 structure in the column
store. So as you can see if you compare
to the others it is the winner. This
table that is using the column store is
consuming way less storage than the
others. So now if you want to rank it
based on the storage the best one is the
column store index table. Then the next
one is the table with the he structure
and the worst one is the table with the
row store clustered index. So that's
true. column store index is consuming
less space than the other type of
indexes. All right. So now what is
unique index? Unique index is a special
type of indexes that going to make sure
no duplicates in your data. And there
are a couple of reasons why is it
important to have a unique index. The
first one and the most obvious reason is
to have data integrity. So the unique
index going to go and enforce uniqueness
in your data and that is very helpful.
For example, if you have a column like
an email address or a product ID. Having
duplicate in such a columns can mess up
your data very badly. So having a unique
index on a column like an email going to
make sure there are no sneaky duplicates
inside your data. And the second
important reason why unique index is
important is to improve the performance.
So for example, if you are searching for
specific email, the SQL going to start
searching for the email value and once
the SQL find the value, the SQL will
stop searching because we are sure that
there is no duplicates in the data. So
with that you are improving the
performance of your queries. So if you
are creating an index and you know this
column is unique then make sure to make
the index as unique index. So now if you
have a look again to our clustered index
where we have the B structure if you
make this index as unique then you are
giving an extra task for the SQL that's
going to go and make sure that all those
ids of the customer going to be unique.
So SQL has to guarantee that there are
no duplicates at all inside your data in
the databases. So now since we are
giving SQL an extra task to prove the
uniqueness of the data building the
clustered index going to be little bit
slower. So that means inserting new data
writing data going to be slower as the
normal clustered index. But now if you
are talking about the read performance
the performance of our query it's going
to be optimized a little bit faster than
a normal clustered index. So again this
tradeoff we are making writing data
slower but we are gaining more speed on
the query performance. So this is what
we mean with unique index. Okay. So
let's keep extending the syntax of the
index. So now in order to tell whether
it is unique or not we can specify it
exactly at the start. So we say create
unique is just before the clustered or
nonclustered and then afterward the cl
store and nothing changed for the rest.
So we can specify this keyword to TSQL,
it should be unique. And if you don't
write anything before the clustered
index, it's going to be not unique. So
for example, this one says create an
index. So we didn't specify anything
here, duplicates are allowed in the
index. But if you go and specify a
unique index, then the duplicates are
not allowed. So it is very simple. Okay.
So now let's go and create unique
cluster. Now let's go and target the
table products. Let's go and first
select the data from the table. So sales
products and execute it. Now let's see
that I'm going to go and create a unique
index on the column category. Let's go
and try it. So create unique
nonclustered index and let's give it the
name index products
category on the table sales products and
we are targeting the column category. So
let's go and execute it. Now we will get
an error because the category has
duplicates. So if you go and query again
our table, you can see we have here
duplicate values and the SQL cannot go
and create unique index for this table.
It's too late. But you still can create
this index if the table is empty and SQL
will not allow you to insert any
duplicates about the categories. And of
course it makes no sense to have unique
index on the categories because of
course we're going to get duplicates
here. But maybe you say, you know what,
my products are unique. The product name
should be unique and we are not allowed
to have in this table two products with
the same name. So if you have such a
rule at your business, you can go and
define a unique index for the products.
So let's go and do that. Now we're going
to go and replace the category with the
products and the same thing over here.
So we are targeting the column products.
Let's go and execute it. As you can see
now it is working because we don't have
any duplicates inside the table
products. And if you go and check the
indexes over here, we can see our new
index. And as you can see at the start
here, it says it is unique non-clustered
index. Now let's go and try the data
integrity. Are we allowed not to add any
duplicate to this table? So let's go and
try that out. Let's have an insert
statement. Let's say insert into sales
products. And I would like only to
insert the product ID and the product
name. and we're going to insert two
values. Values, let's say we're going to
have a new ID 106, but we're going to go
and insert duplicate for the product
name. So, we're going to say caps. We
have already a product called caps over
here. So, we are now inserting
duplicates. Let's go and try it. Now,
you will get an error saying you cannot
insert duplicates to this table because
we have unique index. So as you can see
this index is now helping us and
improving the quality of my table. So
this is how we work with the unique
index in
SQL. Okay. So now what is a filtered
index? A filtered index is a regular
index but with a twist. It only includes
rows that meet specific condition. So
let's understand what this means. So
again we have our nonclustered index and
the B3 structure. So now at the leaf
nodes we will get only the ids the data
that fulfill a specific condition. So
for example if we are saying we want
only the active customers this is the
condition. So that means on the leaf
nodes we will have only the customer ids
that are active and any inactive
customer will not be included at all at
the data page and at the nodes. So that
means our B structure going to be little
bit smaller as usual because we have
less data included in the structure. So
our index going to be smaller than the
regular nclustered index. So now the
question is why is it important to have
a filtered index? Well the biggest
benefit is we going to have targeted
optimizations. So for example if our
analyzes always focuses on the active
users and the inactive users are totally
unrelevant. So that means having only
relevant subset of data in the index
going to make the whole index much
smaller which leads to faster
performance. So it's going to be faster
to query this filtered B3 structure. So
that means we are doing targeted
optimizations and we are improving the
query performance. Now the second
benefit if you think about the storage
since the size of the B structure going
to be smaller that means we're going to
need less storage space in order to
store the index which is great thing if
you have large tables in your database.
So the filter the index going to make
the structure of the index smaller which
going to improve the speed and the
performance and as well reduce the
storage that is needed for your index.
Okay. So now let's check the syntax of
the filtered index. It's very simple.
It's like any query you can go and add
at the end of creating the index the
wear clause and then the condition as
you are doing in any select statements.
But the SQL server is very restrictive
using this type of index. So you cannot
use filtered index on a clustered index.
So it is only allowed for the nclustered
index because it makes no sense. If you
create a clustered index, the entire
table should be reorganized and ordered.
So it will not work for only subset of
data and as well you cannot create a
filtered index on a column store. So it
is only allowed if you are using row
store but you can go and combine the
unique index together with the filtered
index. There's no restrictions. So it's
going to be like this. Create unique
nonclustered index on the table and then
you specify the wear condition. So this
is the syntax of the filtered index and
we have these restrictions. All right.
So now let's say that we have the
following query where we are selecting
data from customers but always in our
program or in our report we are
selecting only the customers from USA.
So we have the following condition. It
says where country equal to USA and
execute. So this is the basics of many
queries that we have in our project and
we are always filtering the customers
based on the country. So in one query we
are finding maybe the top customers and
another query we are finding the average
of scores and so on. But we are always
filtering the data like this where
country equal to USA. So now since we
are using this column a lot and our
table may be getting like million of
records we can go and create
nonclustered index on this column. So
the usual way we go over here and say
create
nonclustered index and we call it like
this index
customers country and then it's going to
be on the
table sales customers and we select the
column country like this. So if you do
it like this SQL going to go and create
a nclustered index for all customers not
only from USA but for everything. So
even if the customers come from Germany
which is not really necessary because in
our project we only focus on the
customers from USA. So instead of that
we can go and include the wear condition
inside our cluster. So it's very simple
we're going to go and say where country
equal to USA exactly like our query. So
now the index that's going to be built
it will be focused and targeted only for
subset of data only for the data that
fulfill this condition. So now let's go
and create our filtered index and it is
working. Let's go and check our indexes
on the customers. So let's go to the
indexes over here and refresh. Now we
can see our index over here. It says it
is not unique because we didn't define
anything at the start. So duplicates are
allowed of course which is what we
defined here. And as well it is
filtered. So it doesn't contain all the
rows from your table. It contains only
the rows that fulfill our condition. So
that means now if I go and execute this
query, the index going to be used
because the rows of this query is
included in the index. But if I go over
here and say Germany and execute the
query, it's going to be slower because
all those rows inside the query is not
part of our index. So this index will
not be used at all in order to improve
the query. So this is how we work with
the filtered index in
SQL. All right. So now we're going to
summarize and talk quickly about how to
use the right index. So when to use
which type? Let's start with the first
one. We have the heap structure. So as
we learned it is a table without any
index. So in which scenario we don't
have to use any indexes in case you want
to have fast inserts. So if you want to
have a fast write performance then don't
take any index. So you stay with the
default with the he structure of your
table and we usually use it in not very
important tables like the staging tables
or temporary tables where we want to
insert the data fast and then get rid of
the data later. So here there is no need
to utilize any index. Now if you are
talking about the clustered index, we
usually use the clustered index for
primary keys. It is even a default from
the database. If you create any primary
keys, then SQL going to go and create a
clustered index. So this is the main
usage of the clustered index, you use it
in the primary keys. And if there's like
no primary key in your table, then you
can go and pick another column where
sorting the data is important like for
example a date column. So it could be a
good candidate for your clustered index.
Now moving on to another type we have
the column store index. So when I said
here clustered index I mean clustered
row store index of course. But now the
question is when do we use the column
store index. If you have like big
complex analytical queries where you are
aggregating a lot of data doing data
aggregations then go for the column
store index because it going to give you
amazing performance. And as well if you
are struggling with the size of tables
so if you have a super large table you
can go and use the column store index
because it can go and compress the data
and reduce the size of the whole table.
So for those scenarios we use the column
store index. So again for the row store
clustered index we use it usually for
the old TB systems where you have a lot
of transactions and so on but for the
column store we use it usually for the
OLAP systems where you have a data
warehouse reporting system business
intelligence and so on. Now moving on to
another type we have the nonclustered
index. We usually use this index for non
primary key columns. So that means the
rest of the columns of your tables could
be candidate for the nonclustered index.
And there are a lot of reasons why you
would do that. For example, for the
foreign keys or using it on the columns
that are used in order to join two
tables and another place where you can
use the nonclustered index for the
columns that are used for the work
clause. So there are like many scenarios
where we can use the nonclustered index
but not for the primary keys. Now moving
on to another type, we have the filtered
index. We use it in order to target a
subset of data. So if in our query and
analyzes we are only focusing on a
subset of data all time, it makes no
sense to have one big index for all
data, we can use the filtered index to
have focused index. And of course if the
size of the index is a problem then you
can use a filtered index in order to
reduce the overall size of the storage
of the index. And then to the last type
we have the unique index. you can go and
use the unique index in order to ensure
data integrity of your table and as well
it might prove slightly the performance
of your query and that's because SQL has
less task to do if the index is unique
once SQL finds a match it going to skip
the search so this is a quick summary
and guide on when to use which index
type that usually help me finding the
right
index all right friends so now let's say
that you have created your index ES in
your database and your query is
optimized and you have fast performance
but the job is not done yet.
No
god no god please no no no no
because over the time the indexes get
fragmented outdated unused and this
going to lead to a poor performance in
your queries and as well going to
increase the storage costs and the
overall performance of your database
going to drop down. So indexes like
having a car it need maintenance. So you
need to change the oil and the tire of
the car. And the same thing goes for the
indexes. You have to maintain them. They
need attention to keep everything
running smoothly. So now I'm going to
show you how I manage, maintain, and
monitor the indexes of my SQL projects.
So let's
go. The first and the most important
task is to monitor the usage of your
indexes. So of course the first question
we have to ask ourself over the time are
we using really the indexes that we have
created are they really helping
improving the speed of my queries or was
it just a good idea at the start of the
project and later no one used those
indexes. This is very crucial because if
you are having an unused index you are
consuming unnecessary storage space and
as well the right performance in the
tables going to be slow which is
completely unnecessary if you are not
using the index. So now our task is to
find out the usage of each index that
you have in the projects. So let's see
how we can do that. So now previously we
have created like multiple indexes on
the table DB customers. So if you go to
the DB customers and to the indexes, you
can see that we have four indexes. Now
we can go and show those informations by
using a special stored procedures from
the SQL server called SP help index.
Let's go and do that. So SP help index.
So it is a system stored procedure that
comes with the database. So this stored
procedure needs only one value and that
is the table name. So we have it over
here sales DB customers. Let's go and
query it. So we have four indexes. Then
we have a nice description of the index.
So it says it is nonclustered index and
whether it is column store. And it say
where it is located. So it says it
located on primary. Primary is the name
of the file group where the data is
stored. And as a default it can be
stored as primary. And now the next
information we have the index keys. It
is nice information to understand which
keys are used or which columns are used
for the index. So the first one you can
see we have two columns that means it is
a composite index and of course for the
column store we don't have any columns
and then we have the first name last
name. So this is a really nice quick
store procedure in order to see
information about our index. Okay. So
now let's focus on our task on how to
monitor the usage of the indexes. Now in
databases we have a lot of schemas and
tables that protocol the metadata of our
database. And in SQL Server, we have a
special schema called CIS where you can
find a lot of metadata information about
the SQL server. Metadata like the
description of the tables, views,
columns and as well the indexes. So now
let's check what we can find inside the
table indexes. So let's going to do it.
Select star from CIS. This is the schema
name. And then as you can see we have a
list of many informations but we want to
focus on the indexes. Now let's go and
execute it. Now we get a huge list of
all indexes that we have and a lot of
informations for each index. We don't
have to go and understand now each
column. But I'm going to go and select
the main important informations from
this table. So what do we need? The
object ID. This is the table ID. So the
object
ID and we have the name. It is the index
name. And then here we have a nice
information whether it is clustered or
nonclustered. So let's go and select it
type disk as so let's call it index type
and we can go and check whether it is
primary key or not. So let's get this
information as well is primary key. I
will go and just rename it is primary
key and what else do we need whether it
is unique. So it is as well nice
information to have. So is
[Music]
unique. So of course you can go and grab
a lot of stuff. It depends really on
what you are monitoring. So for example,
I'm going to go and check whether it is
disabled or not. So is
disabled and I'll just rename
it. So with that I have like focus
monitoring. I don't have to have all
those informations. So let's go and
execute. But now I would like to go and
change few stuff like for example I
don't want the object ID. I would like
to have the full name of the table. And
as well there is a lot of indexes that
is unrelevant for my database. So now in
order to do that we have to go and get
the informations from another metadata
table. So let's go and call this index
and let's go and join it with another
metadata table. It's called tables. So
tbl and we're going to go and join it
using the so the index object
ID equal to the table object ID. And now
if you like to see the content of this
table we can go and create separately.
So select star from our new table. So
let's see the content of this table. So
you can see we have the name which is
the table name. And I think that's all
what we need. We have a lot of other
informations about the table. Well, I
just need the table name. So let's go
and do it at the start. tbl name as
table
name and I don't need anymore the object
ID. But of course we have to go and use
the alias for each of those informations
in order to understand those
informations comes from the index. So
let's go and do that. All right. So my
query is ready. Let's go and execute it
again. So now as you can see we are
getting the table name and the list is
very short because it is only focusing
on the tables that you have in the
database. And this filter happens
because of the inner join. But one more
thing I would like to go and sort the
data. So I'm going to say order by I
would like to sort it by the table name
and then the index name. All right. So
now let's go and check for example the
table customers. You can see that we
have two non-clustered index and one of
them is column store index. Those two we
have created from the previous tutorial
and we have an index on the primary key
as you can see here is primary key equal
to one and this is as well unique. So
with that we have a really nice list of
all indexes that we have in our
database. But we are not there yet
because our task is how to monitor the
usage of the index. Now in order to get
the usage for each of those indexes, we
have to go to a special view called
dynamic management view. And there the
SQL server going to provide a lot of
statistics about the usage for that
index. And we can find it as well in the
same schema. So let's go and query this
table. So it's going to be select star
from. So the same schema says
dodm
db_ind index usage stats. So let's go
and explore this table and execute it.
Now in those statistics we can find the
usage of two indexes the index number
three and one. And we can see there are
like three usage informations of the
index number one. And next we have like
user seeks user scans and user lookups.
So this is how many times the index is
used as seeks or scans or lookups. We
will understand those informations as we
learn about the execution plan. And here
we have a very nice information about
how many time our index got updated. So
as you can see here is zero because I
didn't add any new data after creating
the index. But of course all those
numbers might be different at your site
because it depends whether you are doing
more queries and practicing. And you can
find here more informations about when
was exactly the last usage of those
indexes and many many nice informations.
So now let's go and integrate this view
with our query. So now what I'm going to
do, I'm going to do a lift join because
if I do an inner join, I will only find
the used indexes. But I don't want that
because I want to see a full build of
all my indexes in the database. So left
join and we're going to go and get our
view and call it S. And then we have to
join it on the keys. So S on. So I would
say let's go and grab the object ID
equal to the index object ID. And of
course we have to join on the index ID.
So it's going to be the index ID equal
to the index ID like this. Now we have
to go and select few informations from
this view. So I'm going to go and select
like all those number of usage. So s
let's get the user
seeks as the user
scans and the
lookups and maybe as well the user
updates and it is really nice
information to understand when it was
the last time used. So last user
seek and the
last user scan. Let me just correct it
over here. And actually I can go and put
those two dates in one date because if
it's like the last seek it's going to be
null over here or the opposite. And now
what we can do we can go and put those
two together actually in one column
because when we have a value over here
it's going to be null and vice versa. So
we can do that using the null function
kowalis like this and we can get this
over here and we can call the whole
thing last
update. So like this and maybe I'm going
to go and rename all those
[Music]
stuff. All right. So now we are done.
Let's go and execute it. Okay. So let's
go and check our new report over here.
So this is our query and let's start
with the first table for example the
customers and go to the right side. And
now we can see that we have three
indexes and from these two indexes we
have only one index that is not used at
all. So we can see over here that the
nclustered index on the country is not
being used and that's because we have
another index about the country that
comes from the column store. So it could
be like this that you are quering the
table using the country but the SQL
saying I would like to go and use this
index instead of the first one. So we
can say okay this one is not really
useful maybe we can go and drop it right
and for the rest you can see okay this
column store index is used twice and the
next one is once again the numbers at
your side might be different and if we
have a look to all other tables we have
a lot of nulls so that means all those
indexes that you have created on the DB
customers let me check only one is used
but now you might say you know what I've
used the index but why I'm not seeing
here any numbers about it well that's
because those numbers will not live
forever and we are using now the express
edition locally at our PC. So each time
you shut down your PC and you close the
client the database going to shut down
as well and those statistics going to be
lost because they are in the memory. But
in real projects the numbers going to be
totally different than here and of
course you're going to get realistic
numbers. Now let's try to target one of
those not used indexes. So for example
let's go with this index. It is not
clustered index on the product. So let's
go and query that. Currently it is
completely not used. So if I go and
select it. So select star from sales
products where
product equal to caps. So with that we
have used the index I think. Let's go
back and query again and let's go to our
index and check whether it is used. Well
it is correct. So our query did use this
index and we can see here it is used
once. And now you can go and analyze in
your project all the indexes that you
have on your tables and you can see
whether you are really using it with
your queries or not. And if you are not
using the query of course you have to
make a decision about it. Maybe if you
are working a team to ask about it who
did create it and why. Maybe there is
like one task in the database that is
not frequently used. Maybe it's
something that is run like once a month
or something like that. So the index is
needed but not that frequently. But
still now we have like insights about
what is going on with those indexes and
whether we need them or not. And if you
don't need them, go and drop them. All
right, my friends. So here is the secret
that 90% of SQL developers don't do
that's going to make you in 1 minute the
hero of the projects. So once I join a
project and after saying hello to
everyone, I open the database of the
project and do one query. I checked the
usage of the indexes of the projects and
I can tell you after working 15 years
with SQL that 90% of indexes created in
projects are totally untouched and
unused. So I collect all unused indexes
and discuss it with the team. And if we
don't find real usage for those indexes,
we go and drop them. So after dropping
all those unused indexes, you have done
two great things for the projects.
First, you have saved a lot of storage
in the database. And second, which is
way more important, you have improved
and optimized the right performance on
the database. So in your first day with
one query, you have optimized the
performance of the database. You have
save storage and you're going to shine
like an expert in your project. So if
you haven't done that, do that
now. All right. And now moving on to the
next one. As we learned, identifying an
unused index is an important task. But
in the other hand, identifying a missing
index is as well very important to
improve the performance of your queries.
So in SQL server, you can get
recommendations from the database itself
about missing indexes for your query. So
let's see where we can find those
recommendations. All right. So now let's
say that you are doing multiple queries
and you are doing analyszis and so on.
For example, I have this query over
here. It is query on the database
adventure works DW and I'm joining just
two tables the fact with the dimension
and then filtering the data based on the
colors and as well on the date key where
I have like a range over here. So once I
executed I got the following
informations. It could be any query that
you are doing while practicing and
analyzing and so on. So now if you have
like slow query and so on you can go and
check the recommendations from the
database about missing indexes. So in
order to do that we can go and check
again the metadata from the database
system to see the recommendations about
the missing indexes. So let's go and do
that. So we're going to go and select
from and now we have to go and target
the dynamic management views and it is
like this dm
db
missing index details. So let's go and
explore the content over here. And don't
forget that those informations going to
be inside the cache of the server and if
there's like a restart or something in
the server you will lose all those
informations. So now from my query there
is few suggestions and recommendations
from the database. Let's go and check
it. So we can see here there are four
recommendations about missing indexes
from the database. So now let's go and
check the first recommendation over
here. You can go and check the table
name from the object ID or you can find
it here in the statements. So here the
database is suggesting an index for the
table dimension product and it is
recommending us to make an index for the
column color and that's because if you
check our query we have like here a
filter the wear condition where we are
seeing the color equal to black and
since we don't have an index on the
color SQL is just suggesting to use an
index for the color and of course in
this situation we can go and use an
uncclustered index. Now after that we
have three recommendations for the same
table fact internet sales. So for
example here it is suggesting to make an
index on the order date K because we are
using it in the filter over here and as
well suggesting to make an index for the
product key since we are using it for
the join. So this is really nice report
about missing indexes in the database
and it could assist you to find out
things that you didn't thought about.
But here my recommendation is evaluate
those informations very carefully. Don't
go and create like an index for each
suggestions from the database. You still
have to think about it. Is it really
necessary? Do we really use this query
very frequently and so on? So don't go
blindly creating indexes for each
recommendations from the database. So
this is really nice tool and assistant
for you in order to make a good strategy
for your indexing. So this is how you
find the recommendations of missing
indexes from SQL
database. Okay. Okay. So now to the next
step, we have to go and monitor the
duplicates in indexing. If you are
working in team with multiple developers
and you are working parallely in order
to optimize the performance of the
queries, what might happen is that
different developers creating different
indexes for the same column in the same
table. But of course, this must not
happen if you have a clean and solid
review process in the project. But we
are human and those things could happen.
So that's why you have to monitor
whether there are like duplicates. So
the mission is to find whether there is
a column that is involved in multiple
indexes. So let's see how we can monitor
that in SQL. Okay. So now it's very
simple in order to find the duplicates
of indexes inside your database. So we
have learned before that we can find the
list of all indexes in this table
indexes in the system schema and then we
join it with the tables in order to get
the table name and then we have another
table in order to find the columns that
are involved in the index. Those
informations we can find it inside the
index columns and now in order to get
the full name of the columns we're going
to go and join it with the columns
table. So it's very simple and makes
sense. Let's go and execute the whole
query. Now as you can see it is sorted
by the table name and the column name
and that's because we can find then
easier the duplicate. So let's go and
check the first table. So the country is
part of this index where we have the
column store nonclustered and again the
country is involved in another index
where we have the customer's country and
this is a row store nonclustered index.
So this is of course bad thing. We have
to go and decide now do we want it as a
column store or row store. And if we
check as well this table, we can find
the first name in two different clusters
the same story. And that's because we
were practicing and creating those
indexes. And that's it. But now if you
have like large schema and a lot of
indexes, I would go and make like a flag
in order to understand whether we have a
duplicate or not. And that's by
calculating the number of rows of unique
table name and index name. And we can do
that very easily using the window
functions. So let's have new row. And
we're going to go and use the function
count since we want to find the number
of rows over. Then we're going to go and
partition
by we need the table name and as well
the column name. Our expectation of this
column should be one. If we have more
than one then there is an issue and that
means the column is inside two different
indexes. And now let's go and sort it by
the column name and descending. So let's
go and execute it. And now we have here
a nice flag where we can see how many
rows we have for a specific column in a
table. So if it's one like those
columns, they are fine. Those columns
are involved only once in one index. But
for the first four rows, we have here an
issue because we count here two columns.
That means we have two indexes for the
same column. So as you can see the query
is very simple and with that we have a
nice report about the duplicates of
indexes inside our database.
Okay, one more thing in order to
maintain our indexes is by updating the
statistics. The database engines usually
use statistics in order to understand
which index should be used for our
query. And if these statistics are not
up to date, SQL going to make wrong
decisions. So let's understand what this
means. Now let's say that you have
created a table and you start inserting
data to this new table. Now the database
engine going to go and create your new
table and insert the data. Behind the
scenes the database engine going to go
and create for your new table
statistics. It's like metadata
informations about your data and that's
like a report or insights about your
table where you can find a lot of
informations like the number of rows
that distribution of values in a column
and as well we can find the number of
distinct values and histogram and
patterns and many other informations
about your table. So now of course the
question is why do we have those
informations in the database? Now
imagine that you are doing select from
where what going to happen the database
engine has to go and create an execution
plan. We're going to learn about this
later in details. It is just a road map
on how to execute this query. So here
for example in order to load the data
from the table there are like different
ways on how to do it. So there is like a
table scan, index scan, index seek. So
that means the database engine has here
three different ways on how to do it.
And now in order for the database to
decide which way to use, it's going to
go and read the statistics of the table.
So it's going to go and collect
informations. Okay, how many rows do we
have? Are the informations are unique?
How is the distribution of the data and
so on. And now based on those statistics
and numbers, the database can now make a
good decision about which methods to use
in order to load the data. So for
example, here the index scan is the best
way to load our table. So this is
exactly why the database needs the
statistics in order to make the correct
decision and to use the correct index.
So now you might ask okay this is
something internal for the database why
do we have to care about it? Well there
is an issue. Now for example in our
table we have 50 rows and let's say that
in the next day you went and inserted to
this table like around 1 million row.
Now the issue that could happen is that
the statistics will not get updated
about this table and the statistics can
still say that we have only 50 rows. So
that means the statistics of this table
is now outdated. And the big issue that
once you query this table, the SQL
engine don't know at all about the 1
million row that you have inserted in
the table because it's going to go and
ask the statistics and it's going to
answer with only 50 rows and the
database going to say okay this is very
small table and let's maybe skip an
index or something. So that means the
database going to make wrong decisions
because the statistics are outdated. And
now your task is to monitor those
statistics and to keep updating them. So
let's see how we can do that. Okay. So
now the first thing that we have to do
is to find out whether our statistics
are up to date or outdated. In order to
do that we have as well to access the
metadata about our database. And for
that as well we have tables and dynamic
management functions in the system
schema where we can find a lot of
details about the statistics. And in
order to monitor the statistics, I have
prepared a query like this. So here I'm
using a table called stats uh where here
you're going to get a list of all
statistics inside our database and the
name of the statistics and then I'm
joining it with the tables in order to
get the table name and what is very
important is the dynamic management
function. So here we're going to get
very important informations like the
last updates and the number of rows and
the number of modifications. So let's go
and query it. So here we can see
informations like the table name, the
statistics name and now it's very
important when the last time the
statistics get updated. So now let's go
and check our table DB customers. We can
see here the statistics name and what is
very important is the last update. So
this tells us how old is the statistics.
So for me it is like 4 days. And then we
can find the total number of rows in
this table. And now what is very
important is the number of modifications
that have been done on the table. So
after updating the statistics on the
19th of October, there were around 15
rows that got modificated. This could be
an insert, update, delete. So any
operation of the table considered to be
a modification. So that you can see
there were a lot of modifications. So
these statistics should be updated. So
now for the table customers, you can see
that the statistics are up to date. So
we have here zero as a modifications and
there will be no need to update the
statistics. So this is how you can go
and check the statistics informations
inside your database in order to make a
decision should I update the statistics
or not. So now let's say that I would
like to go and update the statistics of
our table DB customers. Now as you can
see we have here multiple statistics. So
over here we have this statistics on
this table and as well we have the
statistics on the index. So as you can
see we have here multiple statistics in
one table. One for the table itself and
one for each index that we have in this
table. So now let's say that I would
like to go and update the statistics
only for one. I don't want to update
everything in this table only for one
statistics. Let's go and do that. So
it's going to be very simple update
statistics. And then we have to go and
mention the name. So it's going to be
sales DB customers. And then we have to
specify the name of the statistics. So
let's go and get this over here and
let's go and execute it. So it was very
fast. Let's go and reexecute our query
and check the data. So now let's go and
find it. It was exactly this one. And as
you can see it just got updated and the
number of rows is five and the number of
notifications is zero. So we have now an
upto-date statistics for this table. But
let's say that I would like to go and
update the rest but I don't want to do
it one by one. So what we can do we can
just copy the same thing over here but
we don't specify any name of the
statistic. So we are saying update
statistics and then only the table name.
So let's go and execute it. So now what
going to happen is still going to go and
update all the statistics that belongs
to this table. So let's go and check our
query again. Now you can see everything
disappeared and the DB customer is
completely up to date with no
modifications problem. So this is how
you can go and update your table and you
can do then for the rest as well. But
now there is like one more thing where
you can go and update the statistics of
the whole database. But beware this
might take really long time and we're
going to do that by executing a special
store procedure. So execute SP update
stats. This one over here. Let's go and
do that. And now it is done. And we have
here a pretty long log. It was fast
because we don't have a big database. It
is very small database. So it's not
compared to any real databases. So now
we can see over here that SQL is going
through everything that you have in the
database and trying to update the
statistics. So in many situations it's
going to be not necessary because there
is nothing to update. There were no
modifications and so on. That's why the
database is smart enough to say no it is
not required and it go and skip it. So
now how I usually do it in my project is
that I have like a job on the weekend
where it's going to go and update the
whole database statistics. So with that
I make sure all my tables and indexes
having up to-date statistics. Of course
if you have small database you can run
this like every day but if this takes
long time then you can schedule it in
the weekend. And as well if I know in
the project that there will be in one
day a lot of new incoming data. So we
are doing some kind of data migrations.
So I go and update the statistics after
the data migration is done just to make
sure we have up-to-date statistics. So
this is how we monitor and update the
statistics of the
[Music]
database. Okay. Okay, so now moving on
to the final task that I usually do in
order to monitor and manage the indexes
is to monitor the index fragmentations.
Over the time as your data is inserted,
updated, deleted into your tables,
indexes can become fragmented. So what
is fragmentation? It means like there is
unused spaces in your databases and the
database is not filling them or your
data is not anymore sorted correctly in
the index and this of course leads to
inefficient use of the storage and as
well going to slow down your
queries and in SQL in order to get
everything organized again we have two
methods the first method is reorganize
so it's going to go and def fragment the
leaf level of the index in order to get
it organized and sorted again with the
logical order. So it is very light
operation and it will not block the user
from using your table. And the second
method called rebuild this is
heavyweight operation. It going to go
and drop the whole index and recreate it
from the scratch. And this means of
course not only the data going to get
sorted again but as well the
fragmentations inside your databases and
the index going to be eliminated. So
let's see how we can do that in SQL.
Okay. So now back to our database and
the first question that you have to ask
do we have an issue with the
fragmentations in our indexes. So we
have to check the health of our indexes
in the database. And in order to do
that, we have again to go to the system
metadata that we have and we're going to
check their dynamic management
functions. So there is like a special
functions in order to get an answer in
the SQL server. Let's go and do that. So
we're going to go and select star from
the function. So it is sis dot so it's
going to be sis dot dm db index physical
states this one. And this is a function
that we have to pass few parameters. We
will not go in details just follow me
with this. So we have to give it the DB
ID and a null another null and a third
null and the last one going to be
limited. So we have to do it like this.
So let's go and query it. Now what do we
find? We have the object ID. We have the
index ID and few other informations but
the most important one is the average
fragmentation in percent. So this
columns gives us the degree of the
fragmentations in a word index. If it is
zero then it is perfect. We have no
fragmentation in the index and our index
is very healthy. But if it is like 100
then that means it is completely out of
order and we have to do something about
it. And now you might say you know what
I don't know which object it does and
which index. Well you have to go and
join few tables like the cy.ts and
cis.index in order to get those
informations. So we have to go and do
that like we have done at the first
query. So okay so offline I have done
that. So I joined with the tables and
the indexes and I'm sorting the data by
the average fragmentations and
percentage descending in order to get
the problems at the start because we are
interested where we have high
percentage. So let's go and execute
this. And now since it is practicing
database I didn't insert any data and so
on. But in real projects you will get
here different numbers. And here is my
recommendations about the percentage. If
the fragmentation is between like zero
and 10 that means everything is like
okay and you don't have to do anything
about it. But if the percentage is
between like 10 and 30 then here we have
to do something about it. So here I
recommend to use the reorganize method
in order to sort the data again
correctly. But if you have more than 30%
then here my recommendation is to go and
rebuild the whole index because not only
the data is in wrong order but as well
there is a new spaces in your data page
in the index. So you have to do
something about it. So now let's go and
imagine one of those indexes for example
this one over here has fragmentation of
15%. So now what we have to do is to go
and reorganize this index. Let's see how
we can do that. So let's go over here
and say the following. alter index and
then we need the index name. So let's go
and get it from here and then you have
to mention the table name where the
index exists. So we have it from the
customers. So from sales customers so
now we are editing the index and we have
to tell SQL what to do now. So we just
want to reorganize the index. So you go
and use the keyword reorganize. So
reorganize and that's it. This is very
simple. So let's go and do that. And as
you can see it is completed and it was
very fast because we have small
database. But sometimes it take little
more time if you have a big index and
big table. So after reorganizing you can
go and again check the table over here
and see the results and it should be
like here is zero. Now let's see that we
have another index where the
fragmentation around like 50%. So let's
go and copy it and this time instead of
reorganize we're going to do rebuild. So
I'm going to take the whole thing and
this time we're going to go and rebuild
this index over here on the same table
and instead of reorganize we're going to
say rebuild. So let's go and execute
that. And with that SQL did drop the
whole index and create it from the
scratch. And this is usually takes more
time than reorganize of course. And the
next step of course is to go and check
again the fragmentations and so on. So
that's all about how to make your index
healthy and remove the fragmentations
from your index. All right, my friends.
So as you can see, improving the
performance of your queries doesn't end
by creating them. It's all about staying
proactive. So monitor the usage of the
indexes, check whether there are any
missing indexes, and always make sure
the statistics of the database are up to
date and keep your eyes on the
fragmentations and make sure you have
healthy indexes. So with that you have
learned how I manage and monitor the
indexes once I create them and I really
recommend you to follow those
steps. All right friends, so now let's
say that you have a large complex
analytical SQL query and it involves a
lot of joins and aggregations and so on
but it is slow and of course you want to
go and optimize the performance of your
query by maybe using indexes. And now
the big question is where exactly I'm
going to go build this index on which
table on which columns. So that means
you have to understand where exactly the
problem is. Is it by joining tables or
sorting data or by the aggregations? Now
in order to answer all those questions
we have something called execution plan.
So what is that? The execution plan
going to show you how the database
exactly process your query step by step.
And this is what we need. It's going to
show us where exactly we have a
performance issue. So in other words,
the execution plan it's like your window
on how the SQL database thinks and once
you understand that then you're going to
make a right decision on building an
index. So let's understand exactly what
this means. Okay. So now let's imagine
that you are doing a query like
selecting from table and then joining
the data with another table. So now once
you execute this query the database
engine will not go immediately and start
fetching data from the disk but instead
of that first the SQL has to make a
plan. So it's like you are planning a
trip where you check the Google map in
order to find the best route in order to
reach the destination and the execution
plan is exactly the same thing. The
database has first to plan how to
execute your query and it's going to
build this plan step by step based on
your query and as well the statistics.
So the first step for example how to get
the data from the tables and there are
like multiple ways like scan index or
full table scan and then after that it
need to decide which type of joins going
to be done like is it hash join or a
loop join and then at the end of this
plan it's going to be the select
statements. So once the execution plan
is ready the database engine going to
start implementing the steps. So it's
going to go and start reading your
tables for example from the disk and
then after that it's going to join the
tables and then select the columns and
send at the end the results to the end
user. And now once everything is done
the database engine going to do one more
thing where it's going to go and take
this execution plan and store it at the
cache. And that's because the database
engine can go and reuse this plan if we
have a similar query. So for example, if
you go and execute the same query again,
the database engine here going to
understand ah this is the same query. We
have already built an execution plan for
that. So it going to go and check the
cache and it is way faster to get it
immediately from the cache instead of
building it. So in this scenario, the
database engine doesn't have to make any
decisions or something like that. going
to go and get the plan from the cache
and start immediately by executing the
plan. And of course, the database engine
will not hide the execution plan from
the users. You can go and check it
because you can go and check how the
database loaded the data, how they are
joined and so on. And then you can make
a correct decision on how to optimize
your query maybe by adding indexes. So
let's go back to SQL and see how we can
do that.
Okay, so now we're going to work with
the database Adventure Works DW2022. And
now we're going to go to our tables and
we're going to focus on the fact fact
reseller sales. Now let's go and check
the type of this table. So if you go
inside it and go to the indexes, you can
see that we have an index on the primary
key. So we have a clustered roster
index. So that means the data is
structured in this P tree. So now what
we're going to do, we're going to go and
create a mirror of this table but
without any indexes. So it's going to be
very simple. Select star from our fact
reseller sales and we're going to insert
it in a new table. So
into fact
reseller sales and I'm going to call it
HP for heap. So let's go and execute it.
And now you can see we have inserted in
the new table around 60,000 rows. So now
we can go and refresh our tables in
order to find our new table. So it is
over here factory seller sales and if
you check the indexes you will not find
any. So that means it is a heap table.
Now let's go and do a very simple query
on top of our new table. So select star
from the factory seller HP like this. So
let's go and execute it and we got the
results. So now the question is I would
like to see the execution plan of this
query. Now in order to see the execution
plan we're going to go to the toolbar
over here and we have three things. The
first one is says display estimated
execution plan and we have another one
says include actual execution plan and a
third one says include live query
statistics. So now the question is what
are the differences between them? Let's
start with the first one displayed
estimated execution plan. So here what's
going to happen? SQL going to go and
guess the execution plan without
executing the query. So it's just an
estimation. So this is only a guess an
estimation. The second one is the actual
one. So this going to show you the
execution plan that is used in order to
process your query. So after executing
your query, SQL going to show for you
which plan is used. So that means the
estimated plan it is something before
executing your query and the actual plan
is something after executing your query.
And the third one is while executing the
query. So you're going to get a realtime
execution of your query and you can see
how your execution plan is working. So
now we can go and try that. Let's go and
activate the estimated execution plan.
Now we can see over here we have a new
output where you can see like few boxes.
So this is an estimated execution plan
without executing your query. But now if
you go over here and switch it to the
actual execution plan nothing going to
happen because first you have to execute
your query. So let's go and do that. So
once we have executed we got the result
the messages and here we have a new tab
called execution plan. So if you go over
here you will find the real execution
plan that is used to process your query.
And let's go and try the third one. And
let's go and
execute. It was pretty fast because the
query is very fast. But here we can see
how the data and the plan is working
during the execution. So this is the
live execution plan. And of course we
have the last one which is the current
execution plan. So those are the
differences between those stuff. Now you
might ask why do we have this estimated
and actual execution plans? Well, it is
really nice tool to understand whether
everything like is healthy at your
database because if the guessing is
something else at the actual execution
plan that means this is an indicator
that something is wrong at the
statistics or the index at your
database. So if they are matching the
estimated and the actual then everything
looks good. But now we're going to focus
only on one type of those execution
plans. We're going to stick with the
actual execution plan. So now what we're
going to do, we're going to go and open
two queries side by side and one going
to be from the clustered index and
another one is from the heap structure.
So it's going to be like one to one.
Let's go and query both of them. And now
let's go and try to read the execution
plan. But make sure that you are
activating the actual execution plan. So
we have here now two plans. So now we
are at the he table and we don't have
any indexes. So now the question is how
to read this execution plan? Well, now
the plan is very simple because we have
a very simple query but we read it from
the right to the left. So the first
operation is the table scan and then we
have here a very small arrow to the next
one where we have the select. So from
right to left. So now of course the
first operator is how to read your data
inside the table and here we have
different types of scans and one of them
is the table scan. So table scan
actually is scanning the entire table.
So it's going to go and scan all the
rows inside your tables in order to
execute this query. Now if you go and
mouse hover on the table scan, you will
find a lot of details about what is
happening during loading the data or
scanning the table. But it is little bit
annoying better than that. If you go
right click on it and then go to
properties, you will get in the right
side the same details but it is easier
to read. So the first thing that we have
to read is the number of rows that has
been read. So we can see that we have
read all the rows inside the table which
is not really good and we have another
important informations about the
resources and the cost. So we have the
CPU cost and the input output costs and
what is interesting is the logical
operator the table scan and we can see
some nice informations about the
storage. It says it is row store. Now
let's go and check the execution plan of
this other table where we have a
clustered index. So let's go to the
execution plan. And now you can see that
we have on the right side something
else. We don't have table scan. We have
something called clustered index scan.
It is either scanning the entire table
again or only a range or a part of the
index. And of course in the details we
can see whether it read all the
informations or not. Now if you go and
check the number of rows again the whole
index is read in order to get this
results. So again we have here the total
number of rows inside our table. And as
well you can see over here the logical
operation it is clustered index scan. So
it is not table scan. Now of course we
have to go and check the CPU and the
input output costs whether we are
consuming the same efforts or not. So we
can go and compare stuff. So here we
have like
0.07. And if you go over here you can
see we didn't gain like a lot of
information having an index on this
table. And that's of course logical
because this query is not using any
indexes. It is just like selecting
everything from the whole
table. So now let's go and extend it
where we're going to sort the data by
the primary key sales order number. So
let's go and get this one and as well
for the heap structure. So let's go and
execute it and check the execution plan
and the same thing for our cluster
table. Now let's check first the heap
structure. As you can see here, we have
like two steps. First, it's going to go
and scan the whole table and then we
have sort operator in order to go and
sort all the data in order to present it
in the output. And at the end, we have
the select which is not really
important. So here we have like two
operators. But now if you go to our
clustered index, you can see that we
have only like two steps. There is no
sort step, right? And that's because the
clustered index is only sorted and SQL
don't have to go and sort the data
again. So it doesn't have to go and sort
anything. The data is already sorted. So
this is the first win that you have if
you have an index. So everything is
already sorted and if you have an order
by on this column then SQL don't have to
do it during the query. So now if you
want to go and compare the cost you can
see here we still have the same cost for
the CPU and the input output in the h
structure without any index we have here
like double cost. The first cost is for
the table scan. It is the exact same
amount of CPU and input output like the
clustered but as well on top of it we
have high cost for sorting the data. So
we are consuming more CPU and input
output. And if you summarize those cost
of course this query going to be slower
and bad compared to the clustered index.
So with that in the execution plan you
can understand exactly the benefit of
your index. And one more thing about
this plan if you go over here. So if you
go to the objects and let me just extend
it like this. You can see the name of
the index that has been used for your
query. So it says the index is B key for
primary key. And then we have the whole
thing. So now if you go to our table on
the left side, check the indexes, it
going to be exactly this index. So in
the execution plan you can find as well
which index has been used in your query.
And this is very important to check. If
you create a new index then run your
query and check whether the database is
using your new created index. And if not
then you are making the wrong decisions
about your index. So each time you
create a new index, make sure to check
whether in the execution plan the
database is using your new
[Music]
index. Okay, so now let's keep going.
Now instead of using the primary key,
I'm going to go and filter the data
based on one of those columns that we
have in this table. So let me check the
results and let's take for example the
carrier tracking number. So carrier
tracking number and let's go and pick a
value. the first one here like this and
let's do the same thing for the heap
table and execute it. And now in the
execution plan you see we still have a
table scan and on this table let's see
the execution plan with the clustered
index. Now let's say that I would like
to go and create a nclustered index for
this column. So let's go and do it. So
create
nonclustered index and I'm going to call
it index fact reseller and then the
column name. So on our table fact
reseller and the column going to be
carrier tracking number. So I'm going to
take it from here and let's go and
create it. Now let's see whether our
query going to use this index. So let's
go and execute it and let's go to the
execution plan. Now things looks
completely different than before. So
what is going on? We can see that we
have now something new. We don't have a
clustered index. We have something
called index seek. Index seek is an
amazing sign in your execution plan
because it tells us that SQL server did
find a way to use the index in order to
find the exact data that we need without
scanning a lot of stuff. So that means
now we have like three types of scans.
We have the table scan where the SQL
going to go and scan the whole table and
this can happen in the heap structure
and the second one we have the index
scan and here we don't know whether it
is scanning the whole index or a part of
the index and the last one we have the
index seek where the database is able to
find directly the data without scanning
a lot of stuff. So the worst type is the
table scan. Then we have the index scan
and the best one is the index seek. So
if you check here the details you can
see the number of rows that has been
read is only 12. This is amazing. Let's
go and check the heap scan over here. So
to the execution plan and if you go over
here you can see that we are reading
around 60,000 rows in order to get 12.
But with the index we are reading only
12 in order to get 12 and this is
amazing and very fast of course and of
course the cost of this is very very
small. So if you check the CPU and the
input output you can see those numbers
are nothing and of course if you go to
the object over here you can see which
index has been used and this is exactly
the index that we have just created. So
that means it was a really good decision
to create this index and the SQL was
very happy about it and used it in order
to fast find our data. So now let's go
and check the rest of the plan. And now
you can see over here we have key
lookup. The key lookup is an operation
that we need in order to get the rest of
the columns because from this index we
are getting the data of only one column
the carrier tracking number. But since
in our query we are saying select star
that means we have a lot of columns and
those columns are not part of the index.
So in this index is called don't know
anything about the rest. That's why has
to go and search for the other columns
and of course it is called a lookup not
a scan or something like that and that's
why we have here as well only 12 rows
but from this step we will get the rest
of the columns. So and now the next step
is that SQL going to go and join those
two informations. So we have from the
first one the carrier tracking number
and the second one we have the rest of
course SQL has to go and merge all those
stuff in one in order to have it as a
results. And now this operation called a
nested loops. Behind the scenes there
are different types of joins not the one
that we know the inner lift and so on
but there is another types of joints. We
have the nested loop. We have the merge
join and the hash join. The nested loop
is very good for small stuff. If you
have large tables, then the merge and
the hash joints are way better than the
nested loop. So that means if you are
getting here a lot of data from the
index and the lookups and you seek is
using a nested loop, this is not good.
But for now it is okay because we are
getting only 12 rows and the operation
going to be fast enough. And now one
more thing that we can see inside our
execution plan is the cost in
percentage. So from checking this plan
you can see the select is almost costing
nothing. The cost of the nested loop is
as well like 0%. And then we have like
6% of the index seek. That's because it
is pretty fast and the most expensive
operation that done in our query is the
key lookups of course because it's going
to go and get all the columns. And now
if you go and compare to the heap
structure even though that the execution
plan of the heap structure looks very
small doesn't mean that is faster than
the indexes that we have. Still if you
go and add up all those numbers it is
way way faster than the heap structure.
Now I would like to show you one more
thing. If you want to get rid of this
key lookup and in your query you have
only selecting the carrier tracking
number. Let's go and execute it and go
to the execution plan. As you can see
there is no need for the lookup because
we have only one column and this data we
can get it completely from our index. So
as you can see it is interesting to
understand how SQL is working with your
table and with your index and this is
how to validate whether you are making
correct decisions about your
indexes. Okay. So now let's go and add
more stuff where we are doing
aggregations joins and so on. Let's
extend our query. So I'm going to go and
join it with another dimension like for
example the dim products and the join
going to be on the product key. So
product key and equal to as well product
key. Now after that we're going to go
and aggregate few stuff. So we're going
to aggregate by the product name. So I'm
going to take the product name. So it's
going to be the English product name and
let's go and call it product name. And
let's go and aggregate the sales. So sum
and we're going to get it from the fact
table. It's going to be sales amount. So
as
total sales and of course we have to go
and do group by and not French name.
It's going to be the English
name. So let's group up by the product
name. And that's it. Let's go and
execute it. Now we have a nice list of
products and total sales. But let's go
and check the execution plan. And oh my
god, we have a lot of stuff. So let's
start from the right side. So let's do
it quickly from the right to the left.
So the first thing is that it's going to
go and get the data from the fact. So it
is using the clustered index. And then
after that it's going to go and do a
hashmatch for the aggregation. And after
that it's going to go and sort the data
because it is doing later a merge join.
So all those steps are preparing the
fact table. And then we have another
cluster scan for the dimension. So it
going to go and as well select the
informations from the dimension. And we
have here like not a lot of rows. So it
is very small table 600 rows. And now of
course the result of the cluster scan is
as well sorted right and of course as we
learned the cluster the index going to
go and sort the data. So we have here a
sorted output together with another
sorted output. So we have like two data
sets that are sorted and SQL here
decided to go with the merge join which
is a good join in order to join two
sorted data sets. It is way faster than
joining using the nested loop. So
everything is fine and then the data
going to be sorted and presented at the
output. And now if you are checking this
plan you can see the most expensive
thing happened at the fact table. So
71% of the total cost happened in this
step. Now let's say that the query is
slow and I would like to go and optimize
it. We have learned that if you are
doing aggregations on big tables then
the column store index is a good idea.
So let's go and find whether that is
true. So I'm going to go to our other
table. So our sales table was with the
heap structure. And now you say you know
what let's go and convert this he
structure to a column store. So let's go
and do that. So we're going to say
create
clustered column store index and we're
going to call it index and then the
whole name fact
reseller sales HP and we don't have to
specify any columns. So it's going to be
our table on and that's it. Let's go and
execute it. So now our table is not
anymore heap structure. It should be a
column store. So if you go and check the
informations we can see we have like
clustered column stored index on it. So
now let's go and do the same query and
check whether we have a better
performance. Let's go and execute it.
And of course you have to go and
activate the execution plan. So I'm
going to and now let's go and check from
the right again. So this is our fact
table and as you can see already it is
costing only 6%. Interesting. So let's
go and compare what happened to our fact
table. First of all, we can see that the
physical operation is a column store
index scan. And if you go to the objects
over here, you can see that the SQL did
use the column store. And that is of
course going to happen because the whole
data is stored only in the index. So
there is no way around it. So it can go
and of course and use the index. But now
what is interesting maybe we have to go
and compare the CPU costs. So if we
check over here, it is like
0,000.67 almost the same thing for the
input output. Let's go to the previous
plan where we don't have a column store
and check our facts. So as you can see
here it is way more expensive reading
the fact table than the column store and
as well we have reduced the input output
costs. So as you can see we went from
71% of total cost for the fact table to
only 6%. And the resources that is used
to execute the query it is way less than
a normal clustered res store. And this
is exactly the power of this index, the
column store index. You can use it in
big tables like the fact tables like we
are doing here in this query, you will
be getting amazing performance for this
scenario. So of course you can go and
compare the execution plan by moving
left and right. So as you can see if I
click over here and I just switch to the
other tab, I can like quickly compare
the numbers. But there is another way on
how to compare execution plans and that
is if you go to the execution plan and
right click on it then go to save
execution plan as and then you have to
go and give it a name for example query
pro store. So let's go and save it and
then you can go to the second query
where we have the row store and then
right click on the execution plan and
say compare show plan. So once you click
on that then you have to go and select
the one that you want to compare with.
So open and now on top you have your
query and at the bottom you have the
execution plan that you have saved and
then you have here a lot of informations
where they compare both of the execution
plan and with that you can go in more
details in order to understand which
plan is better. All right friends so as
you can see having the execution plan is
is amazing. We can see how the SQL is
working behind the scenes and we can
understand how SQL is processing my
query step by step. How much resources
it is consuming, whether my indexes are
useful or useless and I can go and
experiment stuff. I can go and add like
an index then test and check whether I
gained like few performance or not. And
we can go and compare like multiple
execution plans before and after until
you get the right index for the right
table and the right column. So the
execution plan are amazing in order to
help us understanding whether our
indexing strategy is correct or
not. All right friends, so so far we
have learned that the SQL server going
to make its own decisions on how to
execute your queries and the SQL make
those plans based on the statistics. But
sometimes the plan that you are getting
from the database might be not the best
one for your query and there could be
many reasons why this could happen.
Maybe the statistics are not up to date
or you have a lot of indexes and the
database engine get confused and here
exactly where we need the SQL hints. So
you can use the SQL hints in order to
command to force the SQL database on how
exactly your SQL query should be
executed. So you can intervene and
change the steps in the execution plan.
So let's see how we can do that. All
right. So now let's have a very simple
query. We are just joining the table
orders with the customers and we are
showing like few columns. Now if you go
and execute it and we go and check the
execution plan, we can see in this plan
that it is using the clustered index in
order to read the data from the orders
and the customers and then it is using
the nested loop in order to do the
joins. Now let's say that our tables are
really big but still the SQL is using
the nested loops and of course this is
not good for large tables and maybe the
SQL was confused with the indexes and
statistics and so on and it decided to
use the nested loops. So now in order to
force the SQL to use another type of
join, we can go and give a hint in our
query for the SQL to use different types
for the join. So let's go and do that.
We're going to go at the end of our
query and we're going to say option and
inside it we're going to say use the
hash join like this. So that's it. This
is our query and at the end we are
giving the database a hint for the
execution plan. So let's go and try that
out. So let's check the execution plan.
And now as you can see is using
different type of join. So with that we
are intervening in the execution plan
and we are making choices. So with that
we have changed the technicality on how
the SQL is joining those two tables. All
right. So now let's go and change
something else like for example instead
of having index scan I would like to
have an index seek. So if you have the
right index in your table, you can go
and tell SQL how to read your data in
the table. So let's go and do that.
Currently here we have an index scan on
the table customers. So we can go over
here near the table and we're going to
say with and inside it we're going to
say for SQL force seek. So we are
forcing SQL to use the seek index. So we
can use those keywords near the table in
order to specify for SQL how to load the
data. If you are not specifying anything
like here with the orders, we don't have
here any hints. That means we are
counting on the execution plan that is
generated from the SQL. But if you don't
want the recommendations, you can go and
specify which one should be used. So now
let's go and execute it. Now we got an
error because the SQL is not able to
process what we are asking for and I
think maybe we are using the force
command and as well the hash join. Let
me just uncomment this and let's go and
give it another try and now it is
working. So let's go to the execution
plan. So you can see we got again the
nested loop. And now if you go to the
customers table you can see now it is
using the index seek. So it is not using
anymore the index scan. So as you can
see again we are intervening and forcing
SQL to use the method that might be
better for our query. Now if you are
creating a lot of indexes in one table
and the SQL is still not targeting the
right index. So if you check the object
you can see it is targeting specific
index. But if you have a better index
than that you can give a hint for the
SQL to use a specific index. And we can
do that like this. If you go over here
and remove the force seek and you say
use index and then we have to go and
specify the index name. So let's go and
get again the primary key over here. Now
I'm telling SQL you have to go and use
this index in order to scan the table
customers. So let's go and try this out.
And if you go to the execution plan you
can see it is as well targeting this
index. So not only you can force SQL for
a specific type of loading or joining,
you can force SQL to use a specific
index that you created. All right
friends, so as you can see, SQL hands
are very powerful, but we have to be
very careful with them because I really
had a bad experience using them in my
projects. So here are my recommendations
and what happens. So what could happen
is that you are optimizing the
performance in the development database
and you start using the hints and the
speed was really good and once you roll
that out to another database the
production database this hint will not
be working correctly. The same hint that
you are using might not improve the
performance and one reason is that
sometimes the productive database has
like large data compared to the
development database. So you have really
to test the hint in each database that
you have. So if your hint is working in
one environment that doesn't mean it
going to work in the other one. So
always make sure to test. And the second
recommendation is that don't use the
hint as a permanent fix for your
queries. So what this means? Let's say
that you are working in the project and
one of your queries are very slow. Now,
if it's not clear why the execution plan
is really bad, you can go and use the
hints as a workaround in order to speed
up your query again, but it's still as a
workaround temporary. You still have to
invest and spend time in order to
analyze what was the road cause. So
maybe it is an old statistics or you
have wrong indexing and so on. So use
hints only to work around and speed up
your queries, but don't use it as a
permanent fix. So friends, SQL hints are
really amazing in order to control the
execution plan, but use it very
carefully and only if there is like an
emergency.
All right friends, so now for each SQL
data project, we have to make sure that
we create a clear guidance about the
index strategy and everyone in the team
has to commit and follow the strategy in
order to make sure that each index that
is created in the project to fulfill a
purpose and that's because without a
clear strategy about the indexing, I'm
going to promise you there will be a lot
of redundancy, unused indexes, uh waste
of storage and the whole system of your
project is going to be slow and bad. So
now what we're going to do, I'm going to
show you my indexing strategy that I
usually follow in my projects. But I'm
going to tell you from now there is like
not one strategy that can fit any
project and any scenario. That's why the
team of each project should brainstorm
in order to make their own strategy. So
now let's have a look to my indexing
strategy.
And now if I have to pick only one
recommendation from me to you in this
indexing tutorial, I'm going to have
this advice for you. Avoid overindexing.
Overindexing is the biggest mistake and
trap that a lot of developers do where
they think adding more indexes. That
sounds like we are speeding up things
and our queries can be fast. But I have
to tell you this exactly lead to the
opposite. And here's why. As we learned,
each time you add a new data to your
table, your index has to get updated,
sorted, rearranged. That means having
too many indexes, what's going to
happen? Your insert, update, delete
operations going to be slow. And this
means your database is slower and not
faster. And one more very important
reason why overindexing is bad is you
make the database confused while
creating the execution plan. As we
learned, the SQL database has to create
the best execution plan for your query.
And if you have a lot of indexes in your
database, it's going to make the process
of creating an execution plan
complicated for the database, which
makes it of course for database harder
to choose the best path and index. And
as well, you open the door for bad
execution plans. And this means it's
going to slow the query because first
the database has to create the execution
plan before executing your query. So
again it has a bad effect for the
performance and as well there is another
bad thing. It can make it harder for the
database to decide what is the best
execution plan for a query and having
too many indexes might make the SQL
database choosing a really bad execution
plan. So overindexing confuse the
execution plan and as well makes the
query slower. So that's why I call this
a golden rule and you have to commit to
it. Just avoid overindexing because it
is double-edged sword and exactly you
have to have the mindset of less is
more. So having a few effective indexes
is way better than having a lot of
indexes. So keep it in mind and write it
in your development guideline for the
team with big statement avoid
overindexing. So this is the first
statement in your indexing strategy. So
now let's check the
[Music]
rest. All right. So now we can split the
indexing strategy into four phases and
each phase has multiple steps. So now
the first step is we're going to go and
create an initial indexing strategy. So
now once you start a new SQL project you
have to define the objectives of the
projects very clearly. So that means we
have to make it clear what we are
focusing on what we want to achieve and
in order to define the goal of your
indexing strategy you have to understand
your system. We have mainly two types of
databases. In one hand we have OLAB
databases. It stands for online
analytical processing. The purpose of
this database is for data analytics and
an example for that is the data
warehouse. So in data warehousing we go
and extract the data from multiple
sources and then we prepare it and
transform it and put it in one big
storage and we call this process an ETL
process. And then the front end we have
like reports and dashboards where the
data is summarized and aggregated and
presented for the end user. And these
reports could be used from users in
order to analyze and have insights about
the data. And now in order to generate
those reports there will be like heavy
reading on the data warehouse database.
So that means there will be huge queries
that's going to access the database in
order to aggregate and prepare the data
for the visualization. But now in the
other hand we have the OLTP systems
online transactional processing. It is
like an e-commerce finance banking where
you have at the back end a database
where the data is stored and on the
front end we have like an applications
for the end users. So now as the users
are interacting with the app this can
cause write operations on the database.
So inserting new data or changing data
and as well there will be read
operations on the database in order to
show the data in the app. So we have
both write and read. So now of course we
have to ask ourself what is the goal
what do we want to achieve and here
mainly there is like two strategy either
you want to improve the read performance
or the right performance. Now if you are
looking to the OLAP system here it's
really you have to understand the
project where is the struggle sometimes
it could be like the ATL process itself
it's slow and mainly the ATL is writing
data from the sources in the data
warehouse and maybe you have scenario
where it takes like every day 10 hours
and 10 hours is of course a problem
because you cannot wait so long in order
to get a new data fresh data to the
report every day. So you can make the
goal of the project is to optimize the
right performance. You want to speed up
the ETL. But actually most of those
projects having another issue. Well, it
is the read operation on the database
because data warehouses normally have
really big data sets and at the front
end the reports generate large complex
queries on the database. So that means
the rate process going to be the pain
point in each OLAP system. So normally
the big goal in each OLAP system going
to be how to optimize the read
performance. But now in the right hand
with the OLTB we have different nature
of database and scenario. What going to
happen? You will not have like big
queries from the apps. You're going to
have like many query many transactions
happening between the application and
the database. So you're going to have
like massive amount of read and write
transactions. So the whole time we are
reading, writing, reading, writing and
so on. But with the OL app we have like
something bigger and slower because in
the ATL we usually run it only once.
That means we are writing only once new
data to the database and this happen
usually at the night but on the
transactional systems you have a lot of
readrs all time. Again depend on the
project but usually the main pain point
in the OLTP is the right operation. So
it could be like this. If you are
building OTP system, the main goal is to
optimize the right performance. Now of
course the question is how to do that?
How we going to optimize that? Well,
again we have to understand the nature
of the database. What do we have in the
OLAP systems is usually like a data
model where you have a very big fact
tables and around the fact we have like
multiple dimensions that are connected
to the facts. So those fact tables are
really big tables in the database and
each time they are used in order to
build a report and the report going to
be using all time those facts in order
to prepare the data for the
visualizations and a lot of aggregations
query going to be done on the facts and
now of course you have to answer now the
question which type of index should we
use in this scenario. Well we have a
perfect one called a column store index.
So the best practice here is and you can
make it as a strategy for the whole
project that we make all fact tables as
a column store index because this is
what we are doing in the OLAP. We are
aggregating large data sets but now the
data model and the scenario is
completely different at the right side
here. We're going to have like a lot of
tables and they have like different
sizes and so on and there are like a lot
of relationship between all those
tables. So it is completely connected.
So you have a lot of like primary keys
and foreign keys relationships between
them and normally those tables are
completely normalized table. So they are
like small pieces but on the left side
we have denormalized tables as a facts.
So here is like one strategy that we can
follow in the indexing of the ALTB is
that we create clustered index for each
primary key of our tables. This of
course can improve a lot of stuff like
searching, sorting and as well joining
tables together. But of course since we
are focusing on optimizing the right
performance on the OLTP you have to be
more sensitive by adding new indexes
compared to the OLAP because each index
you add it could be a reason why the
data is written very slowly. So in the
OLTB you have to be way more careful
adding indexes. So now as you can see
you have to understand the nature of
your project. You have to understand
what is the main issue. Once you
understand your project, you can go and
define like a goal for optimizing the
system. So either read or write or maybe
both of them and with that you are
making like the initial strategy of
indexing your
[Music]
system. All right. So with that we have
an initial strategy for our indexing and
we have a rough plan. Now in the next
phase we have usage patterns indexing.
So now we're going to do a deep dive
into our project. And the first thing
that we have to do is that we have to
identify the frequently used tables and
columns. So that means you have to go
and check the queries used in your
project in order to understand okay what
is the most important table that is used
in many queries. Like for example here
we have the fact internet sales. It is
used like in many many queries in our
scripts. So here you are like developing
a feeling about what are the most
important frequently used tables and not
only that you can go and check how we
are filtering the data on those queries.
So for example we have over here we are
filtering by the order date key is this
kind of filtering is used like in
multiple queries. So as you can see we
have like here a couple of queries where
we are doing always the same where we
are filtering the data by the dates. So
with that we understand there is like a
pattern inside our projects where this
column is used mainly on filtering and
as well for aggregating. So that means
you do a deep dive in order to
understand what are the most and
frequently used tables and columns
inside your scripts. And now of course
what I usually do I go and use the help
of the AI and IBT where I give it my
code and then ask questions about it.
For example, this prompt, it says, "Anal
analyze the following SQL queries and
generate a report on table and column
usage statistics. And for each table,
provide the total number of times the
table is used across all queries. A
breakdown for each column in the table
showing the number of times each column
appears. And I would like to see as well
the primary usage of each column,
filtering, joining, grouping, and so on.
And in the output, as you can see, we
got like nice statistics about my
scripts. So as you can see the most used
fact table is fact internet sales. It is
like 13 times used in the projects and
then we can see like statistics about
each column that is inside these facts.
So most of the time is the sales is used
for aggregating and as we saw the order
date key is used like five times for
filtering and the other keys is used for
joining tables. So as you can see it's
amazing right now we can identify which
tables are important which columns as
well are important and we can like based
on those informations maybe derive our
indexing for our database. So with that
we have identified our frequently used
tables and columns and now the next step
we have to go and choose the right index
type and as we learned before we have
multiple types of indexes and that's
really depend on the usage and the
scenario. So for examples, if your
columns are primary keys, then go with
the clustered index. And if you are
using columns that are not primary key
where you are doing joining filtering,
then think about the non-clustered
index. And of course, if the table is
very big, as we said, you can go and use
the column store index. And if you are
targeting always like a subset of data
only like one year informations, then
you can think about the filtered index.
And the last one, if you have like a
unique column where you don't have any
duplicates, then you can go and apply a
unique index. So it depends on the
scenario and the usages. You have to
choose the right index. And of course
the last step in this phase is that you
have to go and test your index whether
everything is working
fine. So that's all for the phase two.
Then we go to phase three scenario-based
indexing. So here we have to tackle and
focus on specific issues to specific
pain points. So that means we have first
to identify the slow queries. So it
could be reported from users or the team
is doing like analyzing on the logs and
to understand which queries are causing
like performance issues. And now once
you get a list of slow queries then you
have to analyze them one by one and it
is time to dig into the execution plans.
So as we learn we can check how SQL is
implementing our queries and start
looking for areas for example where the
SQL is doing a full scan of the tables
or maybe using expensive operations like
nested loop joins and so on. So once you
understood where is exactly the pain
point the next step is that you have to
go and choose the right index. So which
type of indexes we're going to use in
order to optimize the query. And once
you go and create the index, the last
step is that you have to go and test it.
So you're going to run again the
execution plan in order to make sure
that your query is using the index that
you have just created. So that means you
have to go and compare the execution
plans before and after. And if you see
that there is no benefit, then something
is wrong. That means you have to go and
investigate more and analyze the
execution query and maybe choose a
better index way. And you have to do
this process for each slow query until
you get all your queries fast. But of
course, don't forget indexing is not the
only methods on how to optimize the
speed of queries. So as you can see
through these three phases, we went from
a very generic methods on how to index
our system to something very specific
and scenario based. So as you can see as
we moving in the phases, we are doing
more deep dive into our projects.
All right. So now moving to the last
phase, we have the monitoring and
maintenance of our indexes. As we
learned, the job doesn't stop by just
creating and implementing indexes. We
have to be responsible by keeping eye on
the health of our indexes. And here the
databases offers a lot of statistics and
metadata about your data that you could
use in this phase. So the first step is
to monitor the usage of the indexes. And
as we learned, we can use the dynamic
management views or functions that we
can find in the system schema where we
can see the number of usage of each
index and when the last time our queries
did use the indexes. So with that we can
go and find out all those indexes that
we have created and never been used in
our projects. And now the next step is
that we can go and monitor the missing
indexes. So here we can go and check
what are the recommendations from the
database where the database is reporting
missing indexes from the execution plan
and again we can go and use those
dynamic management views or functions in
order to see more details and as well we
can go and monitor whether we have
duplicates in the indexing. It happens a
lot if you have like a lot of developers
in your team. So it could be that they
are working parallelly to optimize the
performance of slow queries and then go
and create multiple indexes for the same
column. So this is something that we can
go and check whether we have duplicates
in our indexes and if you have
duplicates then you have to go and find
how you can go and consolidate them.
Then the next step we have to go and
update the statistics. So as we learned
statistics are very important for the
execution plan because the database
engine use those informations to decide
the best execution plan for your query
and if the statistics are old then the
database going to make wrong decisions
about how to execute your query which
might lead to bad performance. So here
again we have like special functions in
order to monitor the statistics but here
my recommendation that each weekend have
a job that go and create all the
statistics of your database. And the
last step we don't have to forget about
monitoring the fragmentations as we
learned over the time as you are doing
modifications on the tables. What could
happen the order of the databases could
get wrong or there are like free spaces
on the database that are not used. So we
have like fragmentations in the index
and the same thing we have to monitor
the fragmentations of each tables and
here if the percentage is between 0 and
10 then there is no issue but if the
fragmentation is between 10 and 30 then
we have to go and reorganize the index
and if it's more than 30 then this is
alerting you have to go and rebuild the
whole index and usually for the
monitoring I go and build like automated
dashboard in PowerBI or Tableau where I
go and extract all those metad data and
create a nice dashboards in order to
monitor the health of the database or
you can go and buy some other tools that
are advanced in order to do those
stuff. All right. So this is my indexing
strategy that I usually follow in my
projects. And as you can see, each phase
builds upon the previous one. Moving
from a general strategy to more
targeted, refined, specific strategy
where we define first the goal of the
indexing strategy of the projects. And
as we move with the phases, we're going
to be targeting more specific scenarios.
And this cycle keep repeating. It's not
only one time. So you have to keep
discussing is the goal still suitable
for the projects. You have to keep
analyzing the frequently used tables and
columns and keep searching and finding
those slow queries and always keep an
eye monitoring the indexes and of course
I can only keep repeating this avoid
overindexing. All right my friends so
that's all about the indexes that was a
lot of informations and a lot of
technique. So now you know everything
about indexing in SQL. Now in the next
one there is another important
techniques on how to optimize the
performance. So we're going to talk
about the partitions. So how to divide
our data in order to optimize the
performance. So let's
go. All right. So what is SQL
partitioning? It's a technique in order
to divide a large table into small
pieces and each piece we call it a
partition. Well, this sounds like we are
dividing one big table into smaller
tables but it's not like that. We are
just dividing one table into smaller
partitions. So we going to see it in the
database still as one solid table but
behind the scenes it is splitted into
multiple partitions. So now let's go and
understand what this means. Okay. So now
let's say that you have a table at your
database and over the time this table is
getting bigger and bigger where you have
like hundreds of millions of rows. Now
once you have such a big table what's
going to happen everything going to be
slow. So for example, if you are reading
the table and the execution plan is
doing full scan of the table, this can
take SQL long time until all the rows
are fetched. And if you decide to make
like an index for this table, what's
going to happen? SQL going to go and
build a very big B tree index where
there are a lot of branches and files
and so on. And having a big index is not
always a good thing because if you do
operations like delete rows, update rows
or inserting rows, these operations
going to need long time to process. So
having a big index doesn't mean that you
can have a good performance for your big
table. So that means having a big table
is a problematic because everything
going to be slow. So now what we can do
in order to optimize the performance of
this big table? Well, we can use SQL
partitioning and in order to do that, we
have to understand the behavior and the
transactions that are happening on our
table and what usually happen with that
the table grows over the time. So, you
can have like subset of data that
belongs to 2023 and another one that is
created and updated in 2024 and then you
have something like more current in
2025. So that means we have like in our
table old data and as well new data and
we usually interact with the new data
more often than the old data. So maybe
for example for 2023 there is like only
one read transaction and for the data in
2024 we have done like two reads and one
rights. So it is little bit more than
2023 but for the new data for the
current year there will be heavy
transactions. So we're going to have a
lot of reads a lot of rights. We are
updating, inserting, reading. So a lot
of things are going on for the new data.
So that means we are accessing
frequently the big table only to
interact with the new data and we rarely
need the old data. So what we can do, we
can go and divide this big table and we
usually divide it by like a date. So
that means we can go and split this
table by the year and we put each year
in one partition. So at the end we're
going to have like three partitions. And
now it's really important to understand
that that those are three partitions.
They are not three tables. So that means
at the client side the users can see
only one table but behind the scenes we
have like three partitions. Now let's
say that you have a query in order to
read the data from 2025. And now what
going to happen? SQL will not go and
scan all the data from the table. It's
going to go and only target one
partition the 2025. So that means SQL is
only scanning the relevant informations
the relevant partition and not the
entire table. And now we have another
benefits of having partitions. Let's say
that you're using a modern database and
normally they support parallel
processing. So if you have the
infrastructure for that what can happen
the database engine can process each
partition independently and parallelly.
So whether you are reading or writing
data. So what's going to happen? SQL
going to process your queries parallelly
which of course can reduce the overall
execution time. So that means if you
have a modern infrastructure like maybe
for example the Azure Synapse and so on
go with the partitions because the
partition then could be stored in
different servers and this helps of
course the SQL engine to use all the
resources at once. So that means
partitions allow scalability and as well
parallel processing. partitions going to
make the indexing more efficient. So
instead of having one very big index for
the whole table, if you put an index on
a partition table, what's going to
happen? Each partition going to get its
own index, which means the size of the
indexes going to be smaller. And of
course, this helps a lot with searching
for data or as well extending the index
itself. So for example, if you are
inserting data to the partition 2025,
the SQL will not go and change anything
on the other indexes, it's going to go
and only change the index of the
partition 2025. So that you can see the
power of the partitioning. It improves
significantly the performance of your
table whether you are reading or writing
data to this big table. So this is what
we mean with partitioning and why we
need
it. All right, friends. So now we're
going to go to the process of creating
partitions in SQL. At the start it might
sounds a little bit complicated but
we're going to do it step by step and I
have a sketch for that. So we have like
four steps because we have in the
database like multiple layers. So let's
see how we can do that. Let's go. So the
first step is that we're going to go and
define the partition function. So what
is that? We're going to go and define
here in the function the logic on how to
divide the table into partitions. And
this can be based on the partition key.
So that means we need a column in order
to define the logic. And we usually use
columns with the dates like for example
the order dates or in other scenarios we
can use the region or country and so on.
But the most famous one is the dates and
that's because our tables like get
bigger over the time and there are like
multiple types of functions. We're going
to focus on the range function. So how
it going to work? We're going to have
like a range of dates and then we have
to define like boundary values and let's
say that I would like to make a
partition for each year and in order to
do that we have to define the partition
boundary. So it is like a value the
boundary of the years could be like the
first day of the year or the last day of
the year. So here in this example we're
going to take for the boundary the last
day of the year. So the last day of
2023, 2024 and 2025. So we call those
values the boundary of our function. Now
between the boundaries we going to have
our partitions. So for examples all the
rows for 2025 and earlier years is going
to be the partition one. So between the
boundary and everything before is one
partition and after that between the two
boundaries we have partition two. So
this partition going to be for all rows
of 2024. And then we have another
section the partition three where we
have all rows of 2025 and then between
the last boundary and everything onwards
is going to be partition 4 and here
we're going to have all the rows from
2026 onward. So with that we have now a
logic we are telling SQL how to divide
our data into multiple partitions and
here there is like two methods the left
and the right. So what are those two
methods? So again we have our boundary
and now the big question to which
partition does this boundary belongs to
is it partition one or partition two and
that's why we have those two methods. If
you say it is left that mean the
boundary belongs to the partition number
one. But in the other hand if you say it
is right then the boundary going to be
part and belongs to the partition number
two. So you have to decide whether the
boundaries belongs to the left partition
or to the right partition. And with that
in the partition one, we're going to
have all the rows of 2023 including the
last day of 2023 because in the
partition 2 we only focus on 2024. So
it's just the boundary belongs to the
left partition. It's very simple. Now
let's go and implement that in SQL. So
let's do it. The syntax is very simple.
We're going to say create partition
function and then we have to give it a
name. So it's going to be
partition by year since we are dividing
the data by the year. And after that we
have to define the data type. So we are
splitting the data by a date. So it's
going to be date. And after that we have
to define the partition function type.
So in our example we are using the
range. And now we have to define whether
it is left or right. We're going to
stick with the left. And now comes the
very important step. We have to define
the boundaries. So we're going to say
for
values and we're going to enter here
three boundaries like in our example for
each year we're going to define a date.
So
2023 and the last day of the year. Same
goes for
2024 and for the last one
2025. So with that we have defined the
logic the range we have defined the
boundaries and we tell SQL the
boundaries are a date. So let's go and
execute our function. Okay, so that's
it. As you can see, it's very simple. We
just created a function that split the
data by the date using the range lift.
And of course, this function is not yet
attached to any tables or anything. It
is just a logic that is stored in the
database. All right. So now since our
partition function is stored inside the
database, we will have metadata about
those functions stored in the system
schema. So we have there a dedicated
table called partition functions and
there we're going to find informations
about all functions that we have inside
our database. So let's go and execute
it. And as you can see we find now our
new created partition function. So
partition by year it is a range and it
has an ID and so on. And I really
recommend you to check it before
creating any new partition function.
Maybe you have already one in the
projects. Okay. Okay. So now let's check
the next step in our process. We're
going to go and build now the file
groups. So what is a file group? It is
like a logical container of one or more
data files. So it's very simple. It's
like folders. We're going to go and
create now like multiple folders. So
later we can insert inside them files.
And this is really nice because it gives
us like freedom and flexibility where we
can go and decide how the data files are
organized for each partition. So what we
usually do, we go and create for each
partition a file group. So we're going
to have like four folders or four file
groups for 2023, 2024 and so on. So now
let's go back to SQL in order to do
that. All right. So now let's go and
create those file groups. The syntax is
very simple. So it's going to say alter
database. And now we have to tell the
database where these file groups should
be stored in which database. So I'm
going to stay with the sales DB. And
then we have to tell okay add file group
and after that we have to define the
name of the file group. So the first one
going to be for
2023. So the syntax is very simple.
Let's go and do it for the other years.
So we need
2024 5 and six. Okay. So that's all. We
can just select everything and execute.
So as you can see it's very simple. We
have just created four file groups and
they are empty. So we don't have
anything inside those containers. Now
let's say that you have made mistake
with the namings and so on and you would
like to drop one of them. So the syntax
is as well very easy. So it's going to
say alter database sales DB and instead
of add you're going to say remove. So
once you execute this file group will be
dropped but we need it. So let's go and
recreate it. Now as usual after creating
stuff let's check whether everything is
created correctly and whether we have
any duplicate or anything wrong. So with
that we have as well a file group table
inside the system schema and let's go
and execute it. So I'm just filtering
with the type FG for file group. So
let's execute it. And now we can see in
our database we have four file groups.
Now four of those file groups we just
created it right. So we have the 2023 24
and so on. But we have something called
primary file group. This is the default
file group that is created for each
database. So it is a container for all
data files in your database. And as you
can see we have here a flag saying it is
a default. So it's default and we have
it one and for the rest they are not the
defaults. So this is really nice to see
all the file groups inside your database
to check that you don't have duplicate
and so
on. Okay. Now moving on to the third
step where things going to get more
physically. So so far we have like a
function the file group and all those
stuff are logical stuff. We don't have
data yet. In order to have data, we have
to go and create data files. So, as we
learned before, data files going to
contain our actual data and they're
going to be stored physically in the
database. So, you can go and assign for
each file group like one or multiple
data files. And the file format here is
MDF. It is secondary data files. We have
like primary and secondary. But in the
partitions, we usually go with this
format, the NDF. So again the file
groups are illogical containers and the
data files are physical files where our
actual data going to be stored inside
it. So now let's go back to SQL in order
to create some data files. Okay. So now
we're going to come to the little bit
annoying part where we're going to go
and create files. But the syntax is as
well very simple. So we're going to say
the same things alter database and our
database is sales DB. And then this time
we're going to say add file. And now we
have to give SQL not only the name but
the physical place of the files. So
let's do it step by step. We're going to
open new two parenthesis. So first we
have to define for SQL the logical name.
It is not the file name. It is the
logical name of the file. So let's give
it a name for example B 2023 and then
comma. So this is the logical name. And
now the next one is we're going to give
the physical name of the file together
with the path. So we're going to say
file name equal and now we have to
define for SQL the complete path of the
file in SQL server there is like a
default path where the data going to be
stored and I'm going to go and use the
same path and the path really depends on
the version and as well the type of the
SQL server that you are using. So for
the current version that I'm using for
this tutorial we can find it over here
in this path. So if you go to the C then
program files Microsoft SQL Server MSSQL
and the version for me is 16 SQL Express
and then inside MSSQL data and so on. So
we're going to go inside this folder and
now we can see over here all the
database files. So we can see for
example here the sales DB the sales DB
logs and we have here the adventure
works and so on. So you're going to see
all the files of your database. And what
we're going to do, we're going to put as
well our partitions files inside the
default folder. But for real project,
you have to ask the database
administrators about the exact location
where you can put your partitions. So
let's go back to SQL and I'm going to
put this path over here. And then we
have to specify the file name. So it's
going to be P 2023 dot. And now we have
to specify the file name. So, NDF and
with that we have now a complete path
with the file name. So, we are almost
there but we are not done yet. We have
to tell SQL where to put this file in
which container in which file group. So,
we're going to go over here and we're
going to say to file group and here make
sure to select the correct one. So, FG
2023. All right. So, that's all. Let's
go and execute it. So, let's do it. And
with that we have created a file inside
a file group. I will not be creating
like multiple files inside one file
group. It's going to be like one to one.
So now what we're going to do we're
going to go and create the other files
for each file group for each year. So we
just have to copy and paste and just
change the names. So for
2024 going to be like
this. So that's it. And the same thing
for 2025.
And for the last one 20
26 and we can go and select now
everything and execute it. So that's it
with that we have created now four
different files and we have mapped as
well each file to the correct file group
and I usually don't create like a lot of
files. I just create like one for each
year or maybe for bunch of years. So you
don't have to go and make for each day
like partition or something like that.
Okay. As usual after creating stuff we
have to go and check the metadata. Now I
have here prepared a query where we
query the file groups together with the
files. So all the data informations
could be found inside the table master
files and then we join those tables and
select our database. So let's go and
query this one. And now we're going to
get a list of all files inside your
database. So we see over here we have
the primary for the database itself and
you can see the path of the file and as
well the size of it and we can see over
here we have four files and the file
group that is assigned to and the
complete path of each file and you can
monitor over here of course how the size
of each file is growing over the time.
Maybe one of them is getting like really
big and then you can think about let's
go and split it to multiple files. So
that's it about how to create data
files.
All right. So now we're going to move to
the last step where we're going to go
and define the function scheme. Now if
you have a look to this picture, you see
that there is something missing. From
one side, we have defined how to divide
our data into multiple partitions. And
from the other side, we have repaired
all the files and the file groups and so
on. And now what is missing is the
connection. How to connect those
partitions to the file groups. And we
can do that by using the partition
scheme. So all what we are doing now is
just defining which partition belongs to
which file group. So for example, we're
going to go and map the partition one to
the file group 2023. And with that all
the data of 2023 and earlier going to go
to the file group 2023. And of course we
have to go and map each partition to a
file group. If you don't do that, you
will get error in SQL. And once we build
the partition scheme then we can have
all the component ready in order to have
partition table. So now let's have a
quick summarize. The partition function
going to decide on how to split your
data into multiple partitions. The
partition scheme going to go and map the
partitions to a file group. And the file
groups are like folders in order to
organize your files. And each file group
has one or more data files where your
actual data going to be stored
physically. add these files at the
start. It might be confusing, but now as
you understand each layer, then it's
going to make it easier for you to build
partitions. So now let's go back to SQL
in order to build the partition scheme.
Okay, so now we have the easiest part
where we're going to connect everything
together. So the syntax as well very
simple. It's going to say create
partition scheme and now we have to give
it a name. So let's go with like scheme
partition by year. And now we have to
map the partition function with the file
groups. So first we're going to say as
and then we define here the partition
function. So as partition and now we
need the partition function that we have
created. So as
partition by year and then after that
we're going to map it to the file
groups. And here it is very important to
map it in the correct order. So the
order is very important. So the first
one was file group 2023. The second one
2024 and we have 2025 and the last one
2026. So again the order is very
important and as well it's going to be a
little bit tricky. So sometimes as you
are creating like the functions maybe
you make mistake that you don't know how
much partitions are going to create like
in our example we have three boundaries
and SQL going to create four partitions.
So it happens sometimes that you think
okay I have three boundaries and then
I'm going to get three partitions which
is not really correct. So for example
let me just remove one of those and
let's say I have only three five groups
and let's go and execute this one over
here. Now we are getting error. It says
the partition function generates more
partitions than the five groups. And
that is really correct because our
definition of the logic can split the
data into four partitions. And now we
are giving SQL only three five groups
which is not correct. So we have to go
and add the plus one. And one more thing
SQL will not go and check whether you
are mapping things correctly to the five
groups because it doesn't really care
about the naming of those five groups.
So for example, if you go and put this
one at the end, what's going to happen?
It's going to be a big problem. So all
the years of 2023 going to be stored
inside 2024, 2024 going to be in 2025.
So everything going to be mixed and the
skill can do it like you tell it. So
that's why make sure you have the
correct sorts. So that's it. Let's go
and create our scheme. So it is working.
This is very simple. We just map now the
partitions to the five groups. And as
usual we check things after creating and
I have prepared here like really nice
query from the metadata in order to see
the whole thing the functions the file
groups the schemes you can of course add
to it the data files but I'm just going
to stick with this over here. So again
in SQL server we have a dedicated table
for the partition schemes. Then I'm just
joining it with the functions and then
with the destination data spaces in
order to get the partition number and
the file groups. So let's go and execute
it. And now we can see very nicely the
scheme that we have created and the
function name of the partition. And then
we can see the partition number and the
file group name. So we can see how
things are mapped together. So if you
get it like this then so far everything
is
good. All right. So so far what you have
done we have prepared all the layers. So
we have the setup is ready to be used in
any table. So we have the functions, the
files, the file groups and schema and
everything is ready. But still we are
not using it. The logic just exist and
the files are empty. So now what we're
going to do we're going to go and create
a table but not a normal one a partition
table. So let's go and do that. It's
very simple as well. So create table and
we have to give it a name. So let's get
it as well in the schema sales orders
and I'm just going to give it the name
partitions. So now we have just to
define like few columns inside this
table. So let's get an order ID and data
type int. And let's go and get an order
date. We call it dates with the data
type dates. And maybe just one more
called sales and a data type in. So this
is very normal table that we create in
databases. But it's still not yet
partitioned. Now in order to use
everything that we have defined, we're
going to go do the following. We're
going to say on and now we have to tell
SQL only the name of the partition
scheme. So everything else is like
connected and mapped together because
the scheme is mapping the function with
the file groups. The file groups are
mapped to the data files and everything
is like connected together. And here in
the table we have just to give the name
of the scheme. So the name of the
partition scheme is scheme
partition by year. And now it's very
important to give a column. And since
the whole logic and the function is
based on a date, we cannot go and
specify here for example the order ID or
sales because it makes no sense. We're
going to go and pick the order date and
put it over here. And with that, we have
created a partition table. So now what
we're going to do, we're going to go and
start inserting that out of our table.
So let's go and do that. We're going to
say insert into sales order
partitioned and we're going to pick
values like this. So one and then let's
get any dates like 2023 like for example
my the mid of the month and the sales
could be anything like let's say 100. So
let's go and execute this and let's go
query our
table. So it is this one over
here. All right. So now we have one
record inside our partition table. And
now the big question is in which
partition in which data file did SQL
store this record. So we have to test
whether everything is working fine. So
in order to do that I have prepared as
well a query. So we are again asking the
table partitions with the destination
data spaces where we're going to get the
number of rows in each partition and
then we have the file group and we are
focusing on our table orders partitions.
So let's go and execute this one. And
now we can see very easily we have the
four partitions. our new record is
inserted in the correct place in 2023
file group and in the correct partition.
So with that we make sure our function
and the whole logic that we have built
is working correctly. So now let's go
and add more records. I'm just going to
go and duplicate it. Record number two.
And I'm just going to pick a date in
2024. And this one going to be like 20.
Let's just change the value. So 50.
Let's go and execute it.
And now we have a second row inside our
table. And again the big question is
whether it is working. So let's go and
execute this again. And now we can see
our record is inserted in the partition
2 in the file group 2024 which is
correct. Now let's go and check the
boundaries whether it is working
correctly. So I'm going to go and here
in the third row I'm going to say the
last day of 2025. So it's going to be
month 12 and the last day. So 20. Let's
go and insert it and check our table. So
we have a new record. And now let's go
and check. My expectation here that this
row is going to be inserted in the file
group
2025. So let's go and execute. And that
is correct. As you can see the record is
inserted in the correct partition. And
this is really important to test the
boundaries whether they are working
correctly because it's a little bit
tricky. You have this range left right
and boundaries and so on. So you can do
it like this to check whether the
expectation of your logic is working
correctly. And the last one I'm just
going to do it very fast. So let's do it
2026. And I'm going to pick the first
day of this
year. So let's go and insert it. And now
what is the expectation? I think it is
pretty simple. So let's go and query.
And the first day of this year is
inserted in the partition number four.
So I can say everything is working
correctly. If you get it like this then
you have created successfully a
partition table and you have prepared
all the layers of this partition
correctly. I know this is a lot of work
but to be honest it is fun because for
the first time in database you feel like
you are controlling stuff. Usually in
database everything like behind the
scenes and you don't know exactly where
the files are stored of your tables and
so on. There is a lot of abstraction in
databases but here like we are getting
deep in databases and we are controlling
and managing all those files which is
sometimes it's nice to have this freedom
and flexibility. All right one quick
thing that I would like to show you that
if you go to the database in the
explorer then let's go to the storage
over here. So let's expand it and here
you can find easily informations about
the partitions. So over here we can find
our partition scheme and as well the
partition function that we have created.
it is just a quick access instead of
like querying the
metadata. So now let's have a quick
summarize how everything is connected
together. So we have a table and then we
specify for scale that is connected to a
partition scheme and in the partition
scheme we have everything connected. It
is linked to a specific partition
function and there we have the
partitions and at the same time it is
connected to file groups and the file
groups are connected to the data files.
So as you can see all those layers and
elements are connected together. Now
let's see how this works. So we have
inserted the last day of 2025 and now
the first thing that's going to happen
the partition function going to decide
to which partition it belongs. So as you
can see it is a boundary value and since
we have defined it as a lift it going to
target the left partition the partition
three and then the partition scheme
going to connect it to the right file
group and in this scenario it's going to
be the file group 2025 and we have here
only one file so it going to as well go
to the correct data file and in this
file the SQL going to store this row so
it is pretty
easy and now we come to very important
part where we can understand how the
partitions are really improving the
performance of my query and of course we
can do that by checking the execution
plan. So now in order to compare like
the behavior with and without the
partition what we have to do is to
create a mirror table without partition.
So we have our table here the
partitioned one what I'm just going to
do I will go over here and say into and
we're going to call it sales
orders no partition. So we are taking
the data and the structure from the
orders partitions and of course it will
not be partitioned. So let's go and
execute it. Now if you go over here we
can see that we have two tables. We have
the no partition and the partitioned
one. So now what we're going to do we're
going to write a query on both tables
and then compare the execution plan. So
first let's start with the no partition.
also from and and now in order to see
the effect of the partition what we're
going to do we're going to say where
order dates equal to and now we're just
going to pick a value like 2026 the 1st
of January so let's go and query it and
we're going to do the same thing a new
query but this time for the partitions
so now in order to see the execution
plan make sure to activate it so we go
to the action bar over here and we're
going to say include the actual
execution plan. So let's click on it and
execute. And with that we have here an
execution plan. And let's do the same
thing for the no partitions. So execute
and we have here execution plan. So now
let's check what we have in execution
plan. We're going to focus on this one
over here. So right click on it and then
go to properties. And now we can see a
lot of details about the execution plan.
But what is interesting is the number of
rows. So as you can see we are reading
four rows. That means the whole table.
And of course we have here the CPU and
the other costs. Now let's go and check
the partition. So let's click over here.
So now if you check over here, you can
see that the total number of rows is
one. So SQL didn't read all four rows.
It reads only row and that's because we
have in this partition only one row. And
as you can see the number of partitions
that is used is as well only one. So as
you can see using partition we have
reduced the number of rows that is
retrieved from the files. Now let's go
and retrieve like two data from two
different partitions and check the
execution plan. So let's target 2025 the
last day of the year like this. So let's
go and execute it. And the same thing
for the other
query. So let's check the without
partition. We still we are reading like
four rows. But now if you go to the
other one, if you check the execution
plan and check the table scan, you can
see we are reading only two rows and
this time the number of partitions that
are involved in this query is two and
that's because we have partition for
2025 and 2026. So as you can see it's
worth the efforts. We have optimized our
queries and this has a great impact on
big tables. The number of resources and
the number of reads going to be reduced
massively. All right my friends. So
that's all about the partitions in SQL.
It is amazing and you can use it as well
not only in databases but as well in
many other data platforms and tools
where you always can divide your data in
order to optimize the performance. Now
in the next step what I have prepared
for you after 15 years working in real
projects using SQL. I have a lot of best
practices and tips for you. So I have
collected everything that I know and now
I'm going to show you the best practices
and tips and tricks that I can give you
in order to optimize the performance in
SQL. So let's go.
And now before we deep dive into the 30
best practices, I'm going to give you
the golden rule. The SQL optimizer
responds differently for different sizes
of tables. So that means if you have
small and medium tables like hundred of
thousands, you might not notice any
performance differences if you are
following the best practices. And that's
because the size of the data is small.
But if you have like million or hundred
of millions of records in tables, you
will immediately notice how things can
be faster if you follow the best
practices. And here is my golden rule.
If you get any best practice from me or
let's say you are reading something in
the internet, always you have to test
using the execution plan. So for
example, if you have like two queries
are returning the same result of the
data, I'm going to recommend you here to
check the execution plan. And if you
notice there is no differences between
them in the execution plan then pick the
one that you see it is easier to read
and to understand because sometimes if
you are following the best practices for
the performance your query might be like
little bit more complicated. So always
write the query to be understandable and
only optimize it if you notice it is
slow. So the golden rule here is always
test. If you find you are optimizing the
performance with the new query then pick
that and if there is no gain in the
performance then focus on making your
queries readable. So this is the golden
rule always test test test using
execution plan. So let's deep dive into
best practices and we're going to start
by optimizing the performance of our
queries. All right let's start with the
easy stuff. The first step is select
only what you need. What I usually see
in many queries is that the developers
just go and select all the columns from
one table and I can tell you I cannot
think of one scenario where you need all
the columns of one table in one query.
So for sure in the result we will get
like unnecessary columns and of course
reading unnecessary informations going
to make your query slower. So this is
usually a bad practice. Don't use select
star but instead of that go list all the
columns that you need for your query. So
make sure that you only select what you
need. Don't go and select all the
columns from one table and with that you
don't risk reading unnecessary
informations from the database. So
always make sure that you select exactly
what you need for a query don't go with
a star. Okay. Tip number two avoid
unnecessary distinct and order by. I
have noticed that many developers as
they are writing a lot of queries they
tend by default adding always distinct
and order by for each query. And as we
review the code and discuss it with the
developer, we see that we really don't
need to remove any duplicates in the
query because there are no duplicates
and it was only a habit to remove the
duplicates using distincts. And the same
thing for the order by in many
situations there is no need to sort the
data at all. And those operations, the
distinct removing the duplicate and
sorting the data, they are very
expensive operations in your execution
plan. So they're going to take a lot of
resources and slow down your query. So
this considered as a bad practice if you
always go and use distinct even though
it's not needed or you are using the
order by in order to sort the data when
it is not necessary. So the best
practice here is to avoid them. Don't
use distinct or order by only if it is
necessary. Okay. The next one for
exploration purposes limit the rows. So
sometimes especially if you are working
with a new database you would like to
explore the tables just to have a quick
peek in order to see the content of the
tables. And if your database has a lot
of big tables with millions of rows and
so on, you will be consuming a lot of
resources. If you just select the data
like this. So now imagine that the
orders has like 100 million. As you run
this query, the database has to fetch
all the 100 million for you. And usually
for exploration, it's enough to see like
10 rows and that's going to be enough.
That's why it is considered as a bad
practice if you are exploring the tables
to not have a limit or top. So a good
practice would be to say select top 10
and then have the same query. So if you
go over here you will get only 10 rows
and the database will not fetch 100
million. It can fetch only 10 rows. And
now if you are exploring a lot of tables
you will not consume a lot of resource
from the database. So if you are
exploring always limit the number of
rows that you are
retrieving. All right. Right. So now
we're going to talk about how to
optimize the filtering in SQL. So the
tip here is to create an uncclustered
index on frequently used columns in wear
clause. So now of course you have to
check your queries and so on. And if you
see that you are frequently filtering
the data using the order status then it
makes sense to create a non-clustered
index for this column in order to
improve the performance of your query.
So for this situation I'm going to go
and create then a nonclustered index for
the table sales order for the order
status. So once you create it then you
improving now the performance of your
query. Okay. The next one is avoid
applying functions to columns in the
works. So in many cases what we usually
do is that we go and transform the
columns before like filtering the data.
Like for example here I'm applying the
function lower on the order status
because I'm searching for the value
delivered and I'm not sure about the
values in the table whether they have
like a camel case or uppercase or
anything but in order to make sure that
I'm going to find the value I'm going to
go and say lower the order status and
then give here a lower value and of
course it's going to work. So if we go
and search for it and as you can see we
have here the status delivered and the
value is different than the one I used
because here we have like a capital
first character but here we have a
problem we have an index on the order
status and now if you use any functions
like for example here the lower the SQL
will not use the index so that means the
whole index is now useless and the SQL
is not using it and that's why we
consider it as a bad practice to use
functions for the wear clause and
Instead of that the good practice is
that to not use any function and to
write exactly the value that is used
inside your data and with that the SQL
going to be happy and use the index that
you have created. Okay, let's have
another example about this rule and here
we are selecting all the customers where
the first name start with the A. So with
that we can go and use the function
substring in order to get the first
character of the first name and once you
match it with a then you will get the
result and here we have Anna. And this
is again bad if you have an index on the
first name and that's because we are
applying a function on the column. So
this considered to be a bad practice and
instead of that we can go and use the
help of the like. So we can go and
search for this pattern where it start
with the A and then we have a white
card. We don't care about the rest. So
it must start with a. So if you go and
execute it you will get the same
results. So try as much as you can to
avoid the functions in the wear clouds
in order to hit and get the index
working. And in many scenarios, we have
a workaround in order to use the
function without transformations. So try
your best to avoid using functions if
your columns having an index. All right,
one more example that you see a lot on
queries that you filter by the year. So
we are searching for the orders that
happens in 2025 and we usually go and
use the year order dates. And now if you
have an index on the order dates, this
again will not be working because you
are using a function year. So this
considered to be a bad practice. Instead
of using the year function, you can go
and use between. So we don't apply a
function on the order date and we say
the order date is between the boundaries
of the year. Of course, now our query is
not looking really cool and easy like
the first one. But still with the second
one, we are hitting the index. So again
while you are filtering, try to not use
functions on the columns because it is
really waste if you have an index and
you are not using it. and most of the
cases you have like a workound for your
function. So those are the three
examples that I wanted to show you about
this tip. All right, moving on to a
similar one. It says avoid leading wild
cards as they prevent index usage. So
this is a similar one. Let's say for
example I'm searching for the word gold
inside the last name. And here we have
to be careful what we are searching for.
Should the gold exist somewhere in the
last name or only we are searching for
the last name that start with gold? If
it's like that we are searching only the
last name that starts with gold then we
are doing it here wrong. And in SQL if
you're using the leading wild card then
the SQL will not be using the index. But
if you are using the wild card at the
end and the trailing this one is fine
and will not avoid using the index. So
this considered as a bad practice
because you will not be hitting the
index. Better than that to not use the
white card as a leading and if that's
enough for your search then with that
you are hitting and using the index.
Okay, moving on to the next one. It says
use in instead of multiple or or
operator is very evil for performance
and try to avoid using it. It really
kills your performance whether it is in
the filters or joins and so on. So now
we want to show the orders where the
customers is equal to one or two or
three. And of course this is considered
to be bad practice and hard to read and
so on. Please don't do that. Instead we
have the in operator and we are saying
if the customer is one of those values
then show the orders. So if you go and
run it you will get the exact results
and it's not only looks nicer than the
first query but it has as well a better
performance. So if you find out writing
a lot of ors think about the inoperator.
So those are the best practices for
filtering data to improve the
performance.
Okay, so now we're going to focus on how
to optimize joining tables in SQL. So
the first tip here is to understand the
speed of joins and to use inner join
when it's possible. Well, as we learned
before, we have like different types of
joins. We have the inner, left, right,
and outer join. And if we talk about the
performance, the best performance you
will get from the inner join. And that's
because SQL going to work only on the
matching rows. That means the effort and
the processing time is better than the
other joins. Now in the next one in
ranking we have the left and right
joins. They are slightly slower than the
inner join because usually they process
more data and more rows than the inner
join because SQL will work not only with
the matching rows as well with the
unmatching rows. So for right and left
SQL has to do more stuff than the inner
join. And now the worst type of joins we
have the outer join. And that and that's
because this type works with the biggest
number of rows compared to the other
types. It's going to present unmatching
rows from the left and from the right
tables. So that means SQL has a lot of
to-do and that's why this join has the
worst performance. So here my advice is
always try to use the inner join if it's
enough to work with the matching rows
and if the matching rows is not enough
then go with the lift join maybe. But
try your best always to bring the inner
join instead of lift join. But don't
forget inner join filters the data.
Okay. The next one it says use explicit
join the unzi join instead of implicit
join. Well it is considered as a bad
practice if you join tables like this
the implicit join or the nonzi join.
It's better to use the normal modern
join where you use the inner join for
example. about the performance. There is
like no differences between them. And
for this scenario, it's very simple. But
if you have like a complex query, then
joining table like this might be very
confusing and really hard to read and as
well complex to optimize. That's why the
best practice says go with the normal
inner join. So go with the anzi join
instead of the nonzi join. Okay. To the
next tip. Make sure to index the columns
used in the on clause. So we have to go
and make sure that both of those columns
has an index because indexes speed up
the lookup process. Without an index,
the SQL might go and do a full table
scan. Without an index on those columns,
the database might go and scan the
entire tables in order to find a match.
And that is really slow if you have big
tables. So now if you go to the
customers over here and then to the
indexes, we can see that we have an
index, a clustered index for the
customer ID. But if you check the
customer ID in the orders, we don't have
an index for that. So this one doesn't
have an index. So in order to fix that,
we're going to go and create an
uncclustered index on the table orders
for the customer's ID since it is a
foreign key. So once we do that, we have
now an index for both of those columns
and with that our join going to be
faster. Okay. So now we come to a tip
where we say really it depends on there
is like not one clear way on how to do
it. But let's say if you have a big
tables, it is better to filter data
before joining. And here we have like
three different scenarios that going to
deliver the same results. But of course
the question is which one is the best
for performance. So now let's have a
look to them. What we are doing here we
are just joining two tables and then we
are filtering the result based on the
order status that comes from the orders.
So in the first query what we are doing
we are first joining tables and at the
ends we are using where clause in order
to filter the data. So by looking to
this we are just filtering the data
after joining the tables. But there is
another way on how to do it. You can go
and join the tables but on the join
condition you can go and add this order
status equals to delivered. So we are
matching the data by the customer ID and
at the same time we are filtering the
data by the order status since we are
using the inner join. So the filtering
is happening during the join or you can
do it like this where we have here more
stuff to be added where we don't join
the table directly with the orders. We
first prepare the table orders before
joining it with the customers. And here
our preparation is we are just selecting
the columns that we need and we are
already filtering the data before doing
the join using the subquery. But if you
run all those queries you will get the
exact same results. And of course there
is another way on how to do it. you can
go and prepare the data not in subquery
you can go and use a CTE and then join
the result of the CTE with the table
customers. So now about the performance
if your query is like small not that
complex and as well you don't have a big
data inside your tables all those three
queries going to deliver the same
performance. I know it might sounds
weird because here we are like filtering
after joining or here we are filtering
during the join. Normally in databases
the SQL optimizers are now very smart
can understand that there is a filter
here and decide on the best execution
plan for you. So actually wherever you
put your filter after, during or before
the SQL is smart enough to do it
correctly. So if you don't have complex
query and you don't have like big
tables, go with the one that suits you.
And I really recommend you to go with
the first one because it's logical and
easier to understand. But if you have
big tables and complex queries, the best
practices says try always to prepare the
data before joining it. So try to
isolate and abstract the pre-step in a
subquery or in a CTE before joining it
with any other tables. And in many
scenarios in my project where I have a
big table, this did help where the
execution plan was better if I isolate
and prepare the data before joining it.
So if you have small or medium tables,
go with the normal way, use the wear
clause. But if you have complex big
tables, prepare the data in subquery or
CTE and then join it with the tables.
Okay. And now moving on to tip number
12. It is similar to the previous one
but this time it says aggregate data
before joining tables and again it is
special case to improve the performance
of big tables. So now we have the
following scenario where we are joining
the orders and the customers and we are
aggregating the data by the customer ID
but we are just joining the table
customers because we need the first
name. So as a result we have the
customer ID, the first name and the
order count. So the standard way is to
join the tables and then do a group by
in order to summarize the data. Now if
you look to this query, we actually
don't need the join in order to do the
aggregations. We can do first the
aggregation like preparing the orders
with the aggregated data and then join
the result with the customers in order
to get the first name. So again we
prepare first and then we do the join
and we can do that using either the
subqueries or using the CTE. So in this
scenario first we are doing the group by
we are aggregating the data and the
result of this is joined with the
customers tables in order to get the
first name. Now of course there are like
many ways on how to do it like for
example as well using the correlated
queries where we can go and use the
subquery in the select statements and
then use the where condition over here
to make the correlated query. Now all
those three going to deliver the same
results but the question here again
which one has the best performance?
Well, I can go immediately and tell you
that correlated subqueries are the worst
one. Always avoid using correlated
subqueries. They has really bad
performance. And that's because SQL
going to go and do the aggregations for
each customer individually. So it's
going to go like for each row and doing
aggregation then to the next row and so
on. So it takes long time. So this is
bad practices. Don't use it. Now we are
left again with the first option and the
second option. And here my tip going to
be like the previous one. I'm going to
say if you have small to medium size of
tables then go with this one because it
is easier to read and to understand and
you will gain exactly the same
performance as this subquery. But if
your tables are big the best practices
is to prepare first the data to group up
the data to filter the data and to
isolate it in a subquery or a CTE before
joining it with the final table in the
final query. But again here only for big
tables and always test check the
execution plan whether you are really
getting any benefits from it. All right.
So if you have big tables try to prepare
the data first in city subquery and then
join. Okay moving on to the next tip. It
says use union instead of or operator in
joins. So what this means sometime let's
say that you are joining two tables the
customers and the orders. And now about
the join key, you can see over here it
says the customer ID should be equal to
the customer ID from the orders or the
customer ID should be equal to the
saleserson's ID. If one of these two
conditions is fulfilled, then we have a
match. And I can tell you the or
operator over here is a performance
killer. It has really bad performance.
So try to avoid it. Don't use ore in the
joins. It has a lot of problems like it
avoid indexes, it create like loop joins
and so on. That's why we consider it as
a bad practice. And now in order to get
the same results, we can go and split
the joins. So we can go and have two
queries. The first query is joining the
data based on the customer ID and the
second query based on the saleserson and
then we go and merge those two results
using the union. It sounds like bigger
and too much for the SQL but with this
you will get better performance than
using this simple or operator. So again
if you have big tables try to avoid
using or and instead of that go and use
union. Okay the next tip says check for
nested loops and use SQL hints. Now
imagine that we have like big tables and
we are joining tables. So now if you are
checking the execution plan you have to
check always the join type. So for
example here it is using the nested
loops which is of course is okay because
we have small tables but if you have big
tables and still SQL is using for some
reason the nested loops then this is
alerting. So in order to change this
what we can do we can go and use the SQL
hints in order to force SQL to use the
hash join. Hash join is really good if
you have a big table like for example
the orders that is joins with a small
table like the customers. So now what we
can do at the end we can write over here
option hash join. So let's go and
execute it and let's check the execution
plan and with that we have forced SQL to
use the hash join or hash match. Again
you have here really to evaluate your
tables. If you have like small tables
don't bother with that. But if you have
big tables and SQL still doing the
nested loops, nested loops are usually
very slow because you have a lot of
iterations and so on and with the hash
join that small table going to be stored
in the memory and then you have really a
quick matching between the two tables.
So those are all the best practices and
tips on how to optimize joining tables
in SQL. All right, so now we're going to
talk about union and here is the best
practices. It says use union all instead
of using union if duplicates are
acceptable. So it's very simple. If the
duplicates are acceptable or let's say
that there is no duplicates then don't
go with the union because it needs more
time to be executed. SQL has to go and
check row by row whether we have
duplicates or not and this usually takes
longer time than using the union all. So
if duplicates are acceptable or you
don't have any duplicates in your data
go with the union all just have to go
and merge all the data without checking
anything and the performance going to be
faster. All right, the next one is
little bit tricky. So it says use union
all together with the distinct instead
of using union if the duplicates are not
acceptable. So you want to remove the
duplicates. So we have learned that in
order to do that we're going to go and
use the union. It's going to go and
merge the data and as well remove the
duplicates which is really okay to use
it if you have like smaller data or
medium. But let's say that you have like
millions of row which is really okay if
you have like medium and small tables.
But again here if you have huge tables
big tables hundreds of millions the best
practice says go with the union all and
afterwards use a distincts. So in the
sub query we are using union all but in
order to remove the duplicates we use
the distincts. But again here you have
to test it to check the execution plan.
If you are getting benefit then go with
this version. But if your data is not
really big you have hundred of
thousands. So go just with the normal
union. the code is smaller and you will
get the same effects but only for large
tables you can go with this best
practice. So that's all what I have for
you for the
[Music]
union. Okay. So now let's talk about
aggregations and here the tip says use
column store index for aggregations on
large tables like for example fact
tables and that's because column store
index going to compress the data. So the
size of the data going to be smaller and
as well the aggregation is super fast
because we are selecting only the
relevant informations only the relevant
columns. So it makes it a perfect setup
for aggregating large tables. And now
let's say that we have hundreds of
millions of orders and we have this
query over here. So the best practice
says convert this table to a clustered
column store index. So if you go and
create this clustered index over here,
the whole table going to have amazing
performance for aggregations like this.
All right. So to the next one, it says
pre-agregate data and store it in a new
table for reporting. So let's say that
we have like a big query where we are
aggregating the data and so on. And this
query takes really long time. Let's say
like 5 minutes or something like that.
But now the problem with that I would
like to show the results as a report
maybe to my manager or let's say during
a meeting it's going to be really bad if
everyone have to wait until the query is
done. So the best practice here if you
have like a query that runs very slow
what you can do you can go and store the
results in a table. So if I go over here
and say into sales summary what going to
happen going to store the result inside
this table. So let's go and execute it.
And now with that we have a nice table
where everything is prepared. So all
that you have to do is to go and query
this table. And of course it's going to
be very fast because it's only select
statements. And with that you have like
prepared and pre-agregated the data to
have like fast reports. So don't forget
about this. If you have a big query you
can insert the result of this query in a
new table in order later to use it for
reporting. But one thing that you have
to make sure that you have always to
update this table. So if we have new
orders, it will not be presented inside
the sales summary. You have to go and
run this query again in order to get new
data inside the sales summary. So those
are the tips on how to improve the
performance of your aggregations in
SQL. So now what is happening here? I
would like to show the orders but only
from customers from USA. So if you check
this query over here, we are joining the
tables order and customers but mainly we
are showing only the orders information
and that means we are using the
customers only to filter the table
orders and there are like multiple ways
on how to do this task. So it's not only
the joins you can go and use the exist
as a subquery and as well you can go and
use the in operator in the subquery. And
now comes the old but gold question.
Which one is better? Should we join or
use exist or in? And oh my god, if you
go to the forums, you will see people
fighting about which one is the best.
Clean tech. Come on, do that again. Do
that again. I dare you.
Okay,
bring it. Oh, you can't say you can't
say one point. Two point. Now, about the
best practices, everyone agrees that's
don't go and use the in operator. So
this is the bad practice. So
bad practice avoid it. Don't use it. And
of course I'm always speaking about big
tables, okay? Not small tables. So we
don't go and use this in order to filter
one table based on the result of another
table. So don't use any operator in this
scenario. Now here comes the conflicts.
We have join and exist. Well, about the
performance of those two, they are very
similar for medium tables. like I'm
speaking about hundred or thousand and
so on. But still you have to test it.
You have to go and compare the execution
plans and if you are getting like
identical results and both of them are
having the same speed then I prefer to
go with the join and that's because to
be honest it is easier to write than
writing that exists. So I'm going to say
from my point of view this is best
practice if the
performance
equal to exist. But now what happens for
me is that sometimes I get better
performance using exists. So I'm going
to say from my point of view the best
practice
here. And now you might ask why we are
getting with the exist better
performance than in the inner join. And
that's because SSQL has only to check
the existence of data from the subquery.
But in the other hand with the inner
join SQL has to go and start doing
matching between two tables. So it can
go and evaluate all matching records and
so on. It is not evaluating whether it
exist or not. And as well sometimes SQL
has to deal with more rows because you
might introduce duplicates as you are
joining tables. And this will not happen
using exists. So for some scenarios if
you are using exist you might get better
performance than using join but everyone
agrees to not use the end operator. Okay
the next tip is to avoid redundant logic
in your query. This happens a lot if you
have a lot of sub queries and if you
analyze it you might find sometimes
there is like redundancy. So for example
this query I would like to have like a
tag for each employee whether the salary
is above the average or below the
average. So now we might do it like
this. we say okay let's get the data for
employees where the salary is higher
than the average and you go and
calculate the average in a subquery. So
if it's higher then you write here above
average and now we say okay let's go for
the below average. So we do a union all
and the condition going to be salary is
less than the average. And now by
checking this you see that there's a
problem. First of all we are querying
the employees like four times. We have 1
2 3 4. So we are scanning the table
employees four times and as well we have
the same logic over here. So we are
calculating the average of salary at
twice. So this is of course I can say a
bad practice and there is like many ways
on how to do it better than that. For
example, you can go and put this
subquery in CTE and then use it multiple
times. But there is like better solution
using the window function. So if you
check this, it is very simple. Let's me
execute it. We are reading the table
employees only once and then we are
using the case statements. If the salary
is higher than the window function. So
we are calculating the average on top of
the whole table employees. If it's
higher then write above average. If it's
lower then below average. So as you can
see it is easier to read and it is
smaller and the performance here is way
better than reading four times the
employees and repeating the same logic.
So here you have always to look to your
queries and if you see that you are
repeating the same things over and over
then you are writing a bad query. Think
about alternatives like CTE window
functions and I'm sure you will find a
better way than reading the table
several times or repeating the same
logic several times. So as you can see
optimizing the queries is not always
about using indexes and partitions. It's
all about using best practices. All
right guys, so with that we have covered
a lot of best practices on how to
optimize the performance of your query.
And as you can see it's not always
creating indexes, right? In many
scenarios it's about how you write the
query. And now in the next section I'm
going to show you the best practices on
how to create tables. So the best
practices of DDL data definition
language. If you have a poor definition
of your tables, this has a great impact
on the performance of your queries. All
right. So now we have here like a DDL in
order to create a table customer info
and it is not really following best
practices. So let's go through it one by
one. The first tip is try to avoid the
data types varchar and text if it's
possible. The vchart and text they are
like one of the worst data types for
performance because they consume a lot
of resources whatever you do like for
example if you are sorting the data by a
column that is var or text it is very
expensive operation the same thing if
you go like and create an index on top
of such a column it's going to be as
well expensive and they cause a lot of
problems with the data fragmentations
and many issues. So try as much as you
can to skip those data type if it's
possible. So now let's go and review all
those columns in order to see whether we
can change something about it because it
has a lot of bar charts. So the first
one over here we have is var because it
is the first name. Well, it is okay. Now
moving on to the next one. We have the
last name as a text which is not really
good because text is worse than vchar.
So it's better to use var than a text.
So here we have to fix it. So var and
I'm going to go with the links 50. Now
moving on to the countries. So the
country is going to be vartar. We cannot
change that. that contain characters. So
the next one is the score of the
customer. H here we can do something
about it because scores are only
numbers. So that's why we can go and
skip this one. So let's remove it and
say you are integer and with that we
have avoided using the varchar. And the
same thing goes for the birthday. The
birthday is a date and here we have it
as a vchar. Well this is not really good
and we can skip that by having this
column as a date. So date is way better
than having a vchar. All right. And the
next one is integer. So with that we
have fixed few stuff. So we have fixed
the score and the birthday. And with
that we have saved some storage. If we
have an index on the score it's going to
be way better than having a var. And if
you are filtering the data based on the
birthday it's going to be faster. So
again try your best to avoid the vchar
and the text. I have seen in many
projects that a lot of developers tend
to use the vchar and I understand it is
easier to make everything as a vchar
than deciding whether it is an integer,
date, float and so on because you can
fit everything in the vchar and text but
this is lazy. Take time to understand
the content of this column and try to
assign it to the correct data type
because this has really impact on the
performance. Okay, to the next one it
says avoid using max or overly large
lengths. So now we have to keep our eyes
on the links of each data type
especially the bar charts. Not only it
going to waste like a lot of storage.
It's also going to like mislead the SQL
by creating large indexes which is
totally unnecessary because the data
itself is small but because you have
defined like a large length SQL going to
check those informations and make
decision to make a big index and large
indexes are always problematic because
they're going to slow everything down by
sorting the data by retrieving data by
updating the index. So it is really bad
practices if you go blindly and define
everywhere max or
255. Again give it a chance to think
about each column and predict a length
for it. So for example if you check over
here we are saying first name v chart
max. Well most of the first names are
short. So we don't need like the maximum
size of a v chart to fit a first name.
So here we can go easily instead of max
with the 50. And the same thing goes for
the column country. We don't need 255
characters for the country name. We can
go with something more realistic like
around 50. I think you can even go
smaller, but it's fine to have 50. So,
the best practice here is to analyze
your data and to predict the size of
each column. And don't be lazy by just
defining max everywhere. I know it's
faster, but it's bad for performance.
Okay. What do you have else? Use the
constraint nutnull as much as possible.
The nutnull is amazing. It has a lot of
advantages. Of course, the biggest
advantage is that's the data integrity
of your table. So with that, you make
sure no nulls are inserted in specific
column. But it is as well good practices
to use it for improving the performance
because if you are creating an index,
you're going to get a better index
performance since SQL knows there is no
nulls inside my tree inside the index.
And in the other side, if you are
writing query, we tend to use a filter
where we say a specific column should
not be null. But if you make sure that
in the DDL it is not null then you can
skip this filter and with that you are
reducing the size of your query. So what
we're going to do we're going to go
through all the columns and decide
whether it is not null and null. So for
example the first name and the last name
they should not be null. So that's why
I'm going to say not null and the same
thing for the last name not null. For
the customer ID we're going to talk
about it soon because we're going to
convert it to primary key and primary
keys are usually not null. So now for
the country we make have it in the
business that it should not be null. So
we go and make a constraint about it.
Now about the total purchases and
scores. If it is new customer, maybe we
can have a null inside our data. So
we're going to leave it empty. And I
think birthday is going to be usually
optional. So we're going to leave it as
well. And whether the customer is
employee or not. This could be as well a
null. So with that we have found out
like three columns where we can have a
constraint about the not null. And if we
go and create like an index on the
country, it's going to be a better
index. Okay. Moving on to the next one.
It says make sure that all your tables
inside the database have a clustered
primary key and as well it can help you
building the relationship between tables
where you have primary keys and foreign
keys and you can join tables then very
easily and as well a primary key has
importance for the performance and
incale server the default going to be a
clustered index which is really good to
have an index on the primary key because
sometimes you are doing like an update
operations or delete operations it's
going to help up by the lookups of
joining tables. So there are a lot of
performance benefits of having a primary
key and make sure that all your tables
having a primary key. So as you can see
the issue of our table we don't have a
primary key and our primary key going to
be the customer ID. So let's go and do
that primary key and as I said as a
default it can be clustered but I'm
going to write it down in case if you
are working with different databases
make sure it is clustered. Okay moving
on to the next one. It's not only about
the primary key we have to take care of
our foreign keys. So the best practice
says create non-clustered index for the
foreign keys if they are frequently
used. The foreign keys are usually
important in order to connect and join
two tables and usually we frequently use
it and not only that we use it sometimes
in order to filter the data and if you
create a nonclustered index for that it
can improve the speed. So what we can do
it's very simple we're going to go and
create a nclustered index on our table
customers info for the foreign key
employee ID. So how to do it is very
simple. We're going to go and say create
nonclustered index on our table the
customer's info on our foreign key the
employee ID. But again make sure that
this is an important foreign key that is
used frequently from your queries. All
right friends so as you can see there
are a lot of best practices on how to
improve and optimize the DDL. Having a
healthy DDL can improve the performance
of your queries. Now in the next section
I'm going to show you the best practices
and tips and tricks about indexing. So
let's go.
All right, the fifth best practices and
the most important one is avoid
overindexing because too many index is
going to slow down the insert, update,
delete operations and it's going to
confuse as well the execution plan about
choosing the right index and the
performance of the whole system going to
go down. And another tip is to monitor
the usage of the indexes and I can tell
you 90% of the indexes that is being
created usually are not used at all. So
they are taking a lot of space slowing
down everything. So go and drop those
unused indexes in your system. The next
best practice is to have a regular job
like maybe a weekly job. So first you
have to update the statistics regularly
as you are inserting new data and
modifying data inside your database. The
statistics and the metadata of your
tables might get outdated and this is
really bad because you will not get an
optimal execution plan for your queries
and this can slow down your queries of
course. So regularly make sure that all
the statistics are updated in order to
have an optimal execution plan. And what
else we can do in this weekly job is
that we can go and rebuild and
reorganize our indexes. And that is to
make sure that we are preventing data
fragmentations in our indexes. Data
fragmentations in your indexes is really
bad because there will be a lot of
unused spaces. The order of your
clustered index will not be correct. So
make sure that at least weekly you are
rebuilding and reorganizing all your
indexes. So those are the best practices
of improving the performance and
optimizing your indexing. If you are
struggling with very large tables in
your projects like having fact tables,
then go and use SQL partitioning in
order to divide these tables into
smaller pieces which can improve the
performance whether you are reading data
from the table or writing data. And of
course you can go and mix things where
you can go and apply a column store
index on this partition table then you
will get the best performance if you are
having large
tables. All right friends so that's all
those are the best practices tips and
tricks that I've collected in the many
years working with SQL. And now my final
thought about this is that try always to
focus on making clear queries. Make it
like easy to read and easy to understand
and try to optimize the performance only
if it's needed. So if you have like
small database don't worry a lot about
the performance because the SQL
optimizer going to pick the best plan
for you and focus only on having simple
queries and if there is like performance
problem always test using the execution
plan. It should be your judge. So if you
are applying any index or you are
rewriting your queries always compare
before and after using the execution
plan. And if you are gaining more
performance then adopt the new query or
the new index. All right my friends. So
that's all the tips and tricks best
practices that I have for you in order
to optimize the performance. And with
that we have covered now everything
about this chapter the performance
optimization. Now in the next chapter
I'm going to show you how I use AI in
order to assist me while I'm using SQL.
So let's
go. All right. Right. So now I would
like to share something important with
you especially as a future developer
that is working with AI. One of the best
ways in order to truly build skill and
to grow as a developer is by working on
complex task and issue on your own. So
when you are stuck on complex task and
you are pushing yourself to find a
solution for it and you are writing your
code in yourself here the magic happens
and the real learning can happen. And if
you jump too quickly and ask the AI for
a solution, what you are doing, you are
skipping an essential step in order to
become an expert. And more important
than that, you won't develop skills in
order to understand when and where the
AI was wrong. So my recommendation here
is to have a discipline. Always try to
solve the task on your own and only turn
to AI if you don't have any more ideas
on how to solve the task. So that's my
opinion and my advice for you.
So quickly what is shippet? It is an AI
program that is developed by open AI
that is trained to understand questions
and provide humanlike answers. So what
GPT stands for? The G stands for
generative. So that means the data model
can generate a new content new text and
P stands for pre-trained. The data model
is already trained on huge amount of
data. And the T stands for transformer.
It is type of neural network
architecture that processes your
sentences in the prompts in order to
understand the context behind it very
fast and accurate. And in the other hand
we have the GitHub copilot. It is
developed by the GitHub and as well
using the same data models from the open
AAI. So that means both shad and copilot
both of them are using the same language
model that is developed from OpenAI. So
the GitHub copilot did train on tons of
codes that is available in GitHub. So
how it works as you are writing a code
in the code editor like for example
visual studio it going to provide
realtime suggestions as you are writing
and typing your code. So now if we
compare those two shad and the copilot
we can say that the shajibet is a
standalone application where you can
interact with it using a website or an
app where you go and start a
conversation with the AI where in the
other hand the copilot is directly
integrated in your code editor like for
example the visual studio code this is
way better than shibility because you
have realtime interaction with the AI
this is a great advantage for the
copilot because everything in one place
so with the copilot pilot you are
getting realtime assistant during your
coding. So the main purpose of the ship
is to have a conversation with the AI
for any topic that you like not limited
only for software developments but in
the other hand a copilot focuses only on
assisting the software development where
you as a developer as you are writing
your code you are getting auto
completion of the code or maybe a block
of code as a suggestion. So these are
the key differences between shad and
copilot.
Now if you are doing software
developments or you are working with
data projects and of course it depends
on your role in the projects there will
be many different types of tasks and
activities that should be done in the
project like there will be a lot of
brainstormings about new ideas and
coding solutions debugging generating
documentations discussing the different
types of architecture doing road cause
analyzes. So the spectrum of activities
and tasks in each projects usually is
very huge. And of course we can go and
use the help of different AI tools to
assist us with those tasks and
activities and there is like not one AI
tool that can cover all those stuff. I
tend to jump between co-pilots and
something like Shajbet. Okay. So now I'm
going to go and map those different
tasks to either sht or copilot. So now
let's focus on the shibbet. The first
one is brainstorming and ideas. So now
if we have in our project a big task or
let's say a big issue that we want to
find solution for it. I tend to use of
course tools like shad in order to have
a discussion about the topic in order to
explore and discuss multiple ideas and
then start evaluating all those ideas.
The next one where I found myself using
shbt is doing the project planning. So
it is as well something high level. You
can go and discuss with the shaj GBT
about the design of your projects and
you can as well discuss the milestones
the road map of the projects. The next
thing that I find myself using shajbt is
for learning knowledge and research. If
you are working with big data projects
you will be overwhelmed with the amount
of cloud services and AI analytics
tools. So and of course you can go and
learn new stuff gather informations and
knowledge using shajibb. Okay, moving on
to the next task. We have generating
documentations. Writing documentations
is always painful process and consumes a
lot of time and I tend to use tools like
shibbit in order to generate those
documentations. But of course, I always
review the documentations and make it
short. Okay, moving on to another topic
where I use shadet is that to discuss
architecture. Of course, if you are
starting new projects, they will be like
different types of architecture in order
to implement the projects. And of
course, you can discuss with the
shajibility about the different types of
architecture and if you give the
specifications about your projects then
you can discuss with the shajibility
which architecture is suitable for the
project. And another task that I find
myself always like researching is
exploring the best practices, tips and
tricks. So you can have a discussion
with the SHP about the recommendations,
what are the best practices, what are
the common pitfalls in order to make
sure that your code and your solution is
always up to date with the best
practices. And one more thing, if
there's like in the projects a very
complex task, then I tend to have a
discussion with a tool like Shajibet in
order to break this complex task into
small pieces and start finding the
solution for each piece. And now in the
other hand, I'm using copilot in order
to solve different type of tasks. So
here where I get my hand dirty in the
code. So while I'm coding I'm using
alltime co-pilot in order to assist me
because it provide directly inline
suggestions and help me to code faster
and reduce the human error that I might
make. So while I'm writing a code or
debugging I tend to use copilot and I
don't find myself going to shy GBT to
ask about code or syntax. We can do it
directly in the copilot. And one task
that is very famous in any software
developments we have the refactoring. So
if you have like a code that is slow and
bad designs and you want to refactor the
whole codes, you can do it directly in
your code together with the copilot in
order to find optimizations. And I use
as well copilot in order to add inline
comments. So I don't find myself going
to ship and asking to add comments to my
codes. You can do it directly in your
code using cilot. And of course if
everything is working perfectly, I have
the best practices, the good
performance, I have the comments, it's
still you have to maintain nice style
and format of your code. And of course
now we can do that directly using the
copilot. We don't have to go and jump to
shajbt in order to style and format your
code. And as you can see I'm currently
using both of them for different types
of tasks. So again if I have the feeling
that I have to discuss something I go to
shbt. But once the idea is very clear
and I know the solution then I start
using copilot in order to write the code
and with the help of the copilot I can
deliver clean and professional code. So
this is how I currently use both
Shajbuty and
Copilot. Okay friends, so now what we're
going to do, I'm going to show you a
quick guide about the GitHub copilot in
the Visual Studio Code. Once you create
a profile and connect it to your Visual
Studio, you will get a new icon for the
copilot. So once you go there, you can
see quickly the status and as well you
can go and disable the copilot. So if
you have it like this, that's means your
co-pilot is active. So now once you have
everything up and running, what you have
to do is very simple. Just go and start
writing your code. So start typing any
select statements. And now you can see
that we have a gray text. This gray text
called the ghost text. It is an auto
completion from the copilot. And now it
says select star from table. And now as
you can see as I mouse hover on it, we
can see that I can go and switch between
different suggestions. So here we have
like three suggestions. One, two, three.
And I'm going to go with the third one.
So now here as it says if you want to
accept the suggestion all what you have
to do is to press tab. So let's go and
do it. So you are accepting the whole
thing. But now if you say you know what
I'm going to accept only part of the
code. So let's go again and write
select. So this time we're going to be
selective. In order to do that hold
control and then with the right arrow
and with that we are accepting part of
the ghost not everything. But of course
if you are accepting the whole thing
just go with the tab. And now there is
another way in order to trigger the
ghost text and that's by defining first
a comments. For example we want to
select the top three customers based on
the score. So now once you start writing
the query the co-pilot going to go and
write a query that is relevant for the
comments. So now as you can see we are
getting top three from customers because
we want the top three customers and here
we have like two suggestions like over
here we have the order buy or without
it. So I will go with order by and hit a
tap. And now here another suggestion
which is correct. In order to solve the
data from the highest to the lowest. All
right moving on to the next one. As we
learned in SQL in order to solve a task
there could be like multiple solutions
and multiple variants of queries that
solving the same task. So let's say that
we have this task rank customers based
on their total order sales. So what you
can do if you start writing the query we
are getting now the ghost text. But now
what we can do we can go and hit ct
controll enter. So now what happens on
the right side you will get different
suggestions and here we have like nine
suggestions on how to solve this task in
scale. So now what you have to do is to
go through all those suggestions and
pick one. For example I can go with the
suggestion number three and say accept
suggestion and you will get it in your
code editor. So this is what we mean
with the copilot autocomp completion and
integrating the AI directly as you are
developing and writing a code. Now in
the co-pilot, not only using the ghost
text and the autoco compilation, we can
go and interact with the AI using inline
shots. So it's something like shimity.
Now in order to trigger the shot, what
you're going to do, you're going to go
and hit control I and then you're going
to get a place in order to ask the
copilot any question like for example
join the query with the
table sales orders. So let's go and hit
it.
And now as you can see we got a full
query where the customers is joined with
the orders and it is totally correct how
the table are joins. So that means
copilot knows already all the tables
that I have in the database and as well
the columns and how to join them. This
is amazing. So if you like it you go and
accept it of course and this is way
faster than having shajibbd because in
shajibity you have to introduce your
database your columns and stuff before
even asking anything. This is exactly
the power of copilot. Now what else we
can do with that? We can go and
highlight part of our codes and then
start again the shots and here we can
say replace this column with an
aggregation of the sales. So let's go
and hit okay. Now as you can see it
replaced it with an aggregate function.
And one thing that is very important the
code is not changed yet. So it is
highlighted and showing you a suggestion
and now you have to accept it or discard
it. If you discard, nothing going to
change in your codes. But once you say
accept, it's going to go and replace
your original codes. So if you go and do
that, now your code is replaced with the
AI suggestion. Okay. Another thing about
the copilot, it's try to fix issues that
you have in your codes. So for example,
we have here an error. If you go and
mouse hover it, you can see a menu from
the copilot in order to view the error
or to fix it. And another way to do
that, if you right click on it, you go
to the copilot. And here you can see we
can explain or fix. So if you go and
explain, you will get another window
where you get an explanation about the
issue in your code. And once you
understand it, you can go and ask the
copilot in order to fix it. So let's go
over here and go to
fix. And with that, the copilot did fix
the issue. It was all about the order of
the select statements. So first you have
to do the group by then order by. So it
helps you to find issues and to fix it
as well. And now, as you might already
noticed, as we are writing the code and
interacting with the Visual Studio, you
will often get a sparkle, this little
yellow sparkle on the left side. So, you
will see this icon each time the copilot
thinks it can help. So, if you go and
click on it, you will get a menu of
different stuff that the copilot can do
for you, like fixing, explaining,
modifying, and so on. Well, my friends,
that's it. This is the copilot, and it
is very simple, but yet very powerful
for developers. And of course, not only
for SQL, for anything like for Python
and so on. Everything is integrated in
one place. I don't have to jump to
Shajibbet and ask stuff. It is live and
I can do it directly as I'm writing my
code. So that's all for Copilot. All
right friends. So now let's switch to
Shajibet. So let's start first by
understanding the structure and the
basic components of Shajbet prompts.
So the first component and the most
important one we have the tasks. You
have to be very clear by defining what
the AI should do and without having a
clear tasks the AI will not understand
what to do. So this is mandatory in each
prompt and then after that you have to
provide some context. So you give some
background informations like for example
you say I am students or I am a data
engineer and so on. And another
components we have to add
specifications. So in the task you give
the main task what the AI should do but
with the specifications you go in
details like for example which topic
should be added or maybe excluded the
number of word counts. So here you are
specifying a lot of wishes and small
details and specifications in order to
get an answer that meet your
expectations. So both of the context and
specifications they are important. And
then after that we have some nice to
have components like for example
specifying a rule. So here you give the
AI a role like for example you tell it
to act as an expert as a teacher
interviewer. So you are setting the AI
to play a role and the last component
that you can add as as well the tone.
Here you are defining like the voice of
the answer in order just to make the
answer like more friendly and easy to
read and engaging. So the role and the
tone they are nice to have and if you go
and use all those components you will
get a better results from the AI. So
let's take for example the following
prompts explain SQL window functions. So
this is very simple and very short and
here we have only one component the
task. So here you are not giving any
context whether it is for data analytics
or for data engineering. So you leave it
up to the AI and maybe the answer that
you will get will not meet the
expectation that you have. And now if
you want to shape it in the way that you
want you have to add more components
like for example this prompt you are
saying you are a senior SQL expert. So
here we are defining the rule for the
AI. So the AI should act now as an SQL
expert. And then the next section we are
adding a context to the prompts. So we
are saying I'm data analyst working on
SQL projects using SQL server. So now
the answer that you will get from the AI
going to use the syntax of the SQL
server and focus on the topic of
analytics. That's why the context is
very important and then we go specify in
the prompt the task the main task. So we
say explain the concept of SQL window
functions and do the following. And now
we go and give more fine details about
what the AI should provide. We are
saying explain each window function and
show the syntax. describe why they are
important and when to use them and list
the top three use cases. So you are now
specifying what you are expecting from
the AI and after that of course it is
nice to have we specify the tone of the
explanation. So we say the tone should
be conversational and direct as if you
are speaking to me onetoone so that it
is not like you are reading a document
you are reading something that is
engaging. So I know this prompt is
really big but still you will get way
better results than only saying explain
the concepts. So those are the main
components that I usually use if I'm
starting like a conversation and a
discussion with the
shajuti. Okay. Next I'm going to show
you the frequently used prompts that I
use in my projects. Now little bit
awareness about using shajib in
companies. If you are working in new
company, make sure to ask about the
rules of using Shia Gibbt because some
companies offer their own chatbots for
few security reasons. So make sure
always to check with the rules before
jumping immediately to sht. All right.
So let's start with the first prompts.
We can use shad in order to solve an SQL
task that you have in the project. So
let's see this prompts. It start first
with the context. So I'm telling that I
have an SQL server database and we have
like two tables. So now I have to
explain for shad the database that I
have. So I'm saying we have a table
called orders and we have the following
columns and we have another table called
customers and here are the columns for
the customers. So that I gave shy a
context about the tables that I have in
my database and as well I was precise
about the database. It is SQL server.
Now after we have the context the next
step is that I'm going to tell SQL what
to do. So I'm telling the AI do the
following. write a query to rank
customers based on their sales and then
I'm detailing what I'm expecting to have
at the output. So the result should
include customer ID, full name, country,
total sales and so on. And here I'm
adding like more tasks. It's not enough
to have a query. I would like as well to
have a comments. So I'm saying include
comments but avoid commenting on obvious
parts because if you tell just include
comments, you will get a lot of
unnecessary comments. Now of course in
square there is like not one solution
for a task. there is always like
different variants on how to achieve the
same task. So usually I would like to
understand what are my options. That's
why I'm telling Shaji write three
different versions of the query to
achieve this task and then I would like
to evaluate each of those versions and
that's why I'm giving the task for the
AI to evaluate those versions and to
focus on two things. It is easy to read
and as well has good performance. Okay.
So let's see what shajivity going to
give us the results. So we can see the
first solution over here where shadivity
is using the CTE. So we can see in the
CT over here that the table first are
joined and then we have like a group by
in order to aggregate the sales. In the
step two we can see over here we have
the rank window function in order to
rank the sales. So of course you can do
that. Let's check the version number two
over here. So they I used the subquery
and it is as well a nice solution where
the shad first prepared the data. So
first done the aggregation before
joining the data. Let's get the last
solution over here. So we have here
single query using window function which
is as you can see it is the smallest
one. We don't have CTE we don't have any
sub queries. So first it is joining the
tables and doing together the group by
together with the window function and
after that we get an evaluation from the
AI where where as you can see it focus
on two things the readability and the
performance. So it is saying with the
CTE the readability is really high
compared to the sub query and to the
last version where you have the group by
together with the window function. So I
totally agree with the shajibbity the
first version was the best one for the
readability. Now checking the
performance. You can see the performance
is moderate. The second one, the
subquery is good. And the last one is
the best for the performance. But of
course, always test with the execution
plan. So as you can see, there is like a
trade-off between the readability and
the performance. If the priority is
readability, then go with the version
one. But if the priority is the
performance, then go with the version
three. As you can see, we got three
solutions for our one task. And you can
now evaluate which one you want to use.
And this is really amazing, right? All
right, moving on to the next one that I
frequently use. We have
impromptability. As you are creating an
SQL query for a complex task, you might
end up writing a lot of CTE, sub
queries. You might end up having a lot
of joins, sub queries, CTE, hundreds of
lines, and you might lose the big
picture. So what I always do, I give the
query to the SHBT and ask it to optimize
it in order to be more readable and to
find any redundancy in my query in order
to consolidate it. So now let's check
the prompt. It says the following SQL
server query is long and hard to
understand. And then we're going to give
the AI tasks. So the first task is to
improve its readability and the next one
is to detect any redundancy in the code
in order to remove it and to consolidate
the query. So to make our query compact
and small and of course to include some
comments and not to comment the obvious
parts and now always if there is like
some optimizations there should be a
learning process. So I'm asking now the
AI to explain each improvement to
understand the reasons behind it so that
next time I'm writing the queries I can
avoid those mistakes and of course you
have to go and give the query to the AI.
All right. So now let's check the answer
from the ship for my prompt. So as you
can see we have a really long query and
here we have now from the result the
improved query. So we can see that we
have only one city. Well that is crazy.
We had before like five six cities and
we can see here that the team managed to
put everything in one city and then do
all the aggregations and the window
function and then we have here the final
select. Well this is huge improvement to
the previous query. Let's check here the
explanation. So it says it consolidated
the cities so combined all the cities
into one and many other stuff like there
were a lot of unnecessary joins and so
on. And here a small improvement where
it uses the concat instead of the plus
because concat is standards for multiple
databases. And here we have a final
benefits. So we have shorter query
instead of five CDs we have only one and
combining the logic you can reduce the
number of scans of the tables which is
correct. So as you can see it is the
magic of the AI. It found the issues in
my code, improved the readability and
reduced all the redundancy and
unnecessary joints and so on in the SQL
script. Okay, moving on to the next
prompt. It is about optimizing the
performance of my query. And if you are
working in big projects where you have
like millions of data in your tables, it
can be an issue if you are writing
queries that are not following the best
practices for performance. So that's why
I go and double check with the AI
whether my script is following the best
practices for the performance. So as
usual in the prompt we have to go and
give the context. So the following SQL
server query is slow and then we start
giving the AI some tasks. So propose
optimizations to improve its performance
and provide me then the improved SQL
query and I would like always to
understand the reason why it's better to
write it in another way so that by the
next time I improve while I'm writing
the query. So explain each improvement
to understand the reasoning behind it
and then at the end we go and give our
query. Okay. So now let's write the
prompts on the following query over
here. So on this query we have a lot of
bad practices like for example doing
aggregations using correlated subquery.
We are using a lot of functions inside
the work clause which is not really good
for indexing and we are using a lot of
or operators and here we have again a
subquery. So let's check whether shad
going to find all those bad practices.
So let's check the results from the
shad. And as you can see now we have an
optimized query. It is little bit longer
but I think we have here better
practices. So we have here a lot of
changes. Let's check what did. So first
it replaced the lower in the query. It
says it's not really good to use
functions in the works so that the index
can work. So it replaced the lower with
the order status without the function.
the next one. So it is avoiding the
correlated subquery. So instead of that
it is using a lift join. So it is
joining the table normally without doing
any correlated queries and as well it is
avoiding the function year in the works
and instead of that it is using the
range using between and the next one it
is using exist better than in which is
better for the performance of course. So
as you can see you can use the AI in
order to optimize the performance of
your query and to convert it to a script
that is following the best practices. Of
course my recommendations always don't
go blindly with all changes that is
suggested from the shajibity. Always
take each recommendation one by one.
Test it and evaluate it using your
knowledge. Okay to the next one. It is
interesting one. We can use
[Music]
impromptution plan. So now the execution
plans usually are advanced. So you need
a lot of knowhow and experience in order
to understand and read the execution
plan and if you have a big query it's
going to be really nightmare in order to
understand the flow and where is exactly
the issue. But now we are not alone. We
have assistant the AI in order to help
us understanding this complex stuff. So
what we can do we can take a screenshot
of the execution plan and upload it to
Shajib and we say the image is execution
plan of SQL server query and now we give
the following task to say describe the
execution plan step by step after that
I'm going to tell SQL to identify the
performance bottlenecks and where is
exactly the issue what makes my query
slow this is of course the hardest part
of reading an execution plan and once it
identify the performance issues I'm
going to ask it to suggest ways to
improve improve the performance and
optimize the execution plan. So first
understand the execution plan identify
the issues and how to optimize it. Okay.
So now after uploading the photo and
asking the AI we have the following
results. So now we can see a detailed
explanation about the execution plan and
there is like a lot of details. I will
not go through everything. So we start
with the table scans then the cluster
scan and the nested loops. So we have
several nested loops and then the
aggregation and the final step. So that
now we have like a nice explanation what
is SQL is doing behind the scenes for my
query and you don't have to be an expert
understanding the execution plan. You
can ask the AI about it. Now what is
very important is to understand where
are the bottlenecks what are the
problems. So let's see what's we have
here. So let's say the first one we have
a table scan which is really bad. That
means this table the orders archive does
not has any index. So it says the table
scan indicates a lake of useful index on
the table which forces the engine to
scan the whole table or rows. And now
what is very important is the nested
loops in the joins. This is really bad
if you have big tables. So here it's
saying it's fine if you have like small
data sets but it going to be really
problematic if you have many rows. So as
you can see we are getting more
knowledge about the issues that we have
from our execution plan. And the last
step it is the suggestions. So the first
one and the most obvious one is to add
an index to the orders archive. The
nonclustered index. Well, if there's no
index at all, I would go first with a
clustered index, not immediately with a
nonclustered index. And then some other
best practices, but I think this one is
very relevant is to change the join
type. So you can use the hints in order
to use a merge join or a hash join. So
now we understand how it works, where
are the issues and what the suggestions
to fix it. All right, the next prompt is
about debugging. As you are writing a
complex SQL query, you might get from
the database an error when you execute
it and sometimes it is challenging to
find the root cause of the issue. So we
have the following prompts. First the
context is going to say the following
SQL server query causing this error.
Then we can paste the error message that
we are getting and then we ask the AI to
do the following stuff. First explain
the error message. So I would like to
have better understanding of the error.
And then we ask the AI to find the root
cause of the issue from my scripts. And
after finding the problem and the issue,
we're going to ask the AI to suggest how
to fix it. And of course, we have to
give in the prompt as well our SQL
query. All right. So now I have the
following query and if I execute it, I'm
getting the following error. It says the
column sales.order dot sales in invalid
in the select list because it is not
contained in the aggregations and so on.
So I'm not really understanding what's
going on. Let's ask the AI about it. So
let's check what shity did answer. When
you are using group by every column in
the select must be used in the group by
as well. And it says in your query you
are selecting few columns which is this
one is valid. The other two as well
valid but we have one inside the rank
function. It is invalid. Okay. So now we
can see here more details about the root
cause. It is saying when you are using
window function like the rank it doesn't
directly work with the aggregate
functions. So here it's indicate clearly
that the sales inside the rank function
is the issue. So let's see the fix over
here. So since we don't have here sales
at all you cannot have here sales in the
partition. That's why the fix here is to
use the sum of sales because we have it
in the select. And here you have as well
a nice explanation about the fix. So you
can see here we have an explanation
about the error message the road cause
it's pointing exactly where there's the
issue suggesting a fix and explaining
the fix and this is exactly the steps
that you have to do if you are debugging
a code all right moving on to the next
prompt we can use AI to explain the
result that I'm getting from SQL well
sometimes you might have an SQL query
that you have in the project and you are
not understanding why you are getting
specific results so as usual we start
with the context we tell the AI I didn't
understand the result of the following
SQL server query and then we ask the AI
to do the following. First break down
how SQL processes the query step by step
and as well I would like to get an
explanation for each stage and how the
result is formed. So as you can see here
I don't need any optimizations. I don't
need in the output any query. I just
need an explanation and then at the end
you're going to go and paste your query.
Okay. So now we have the following
query. We have a recursive CTE where we
are generating like numbers between 1
and 20. Can tell you recursive CTE are
usually like complicated to understand.
So now maybe we are having hard time
understanding the result of this query.
After asking the AI about it, we got the
explanation first about the query
structure. So it says you are using the
CTE with the main query. Well, okay. But
what is very interesting is to
understand step by step how SQL executed
this query. So it tells the step one
it's going to go and execute the anchor
query and that's why we will get first
the one and then the next step the
recursive query going to be executed for
the first time. So it is saying okay we
are adding one to the current value. So
as you can see 1 + 1 we will get two and
then in the iteration two we will get 2
+ 1 3 and it will keep repeating this
process until we get all the result from
1 to 20. And then as well we have here
an explanation about the termination of
the recursive query. So it's saying the
filter is the way out of the loop. So
once we reach the 20 it will stop. And
then a few informations about the main
query and with that you will get a deep
knowledge about how works and why you
are seeing those results. This is really
amazing use case for the GBT. All right
friends. So now we're going to talk
about my favorite prompts. So we can use
the AI to style and format my code. So
now once you are done writing a complex
query to solve a task and everything is
correct and optimized as well for the
performance. Now it's time to go and
review your code in order to style and
format your script. So we have the
following prompt. It says the following
SQL server query is hard to understand.
So now we ask the AI to do the
following. Restyle the code to make it
easier to read. And the next task for AI
is to align all the columns aliases.
Sometimes if you are using any tool to
style and format your code, you will
find that it is bringing a lot of new
lines. So I tell he AI, keep it compact,
do not introduce unnecessary new lines.
And the last task for the AI is to make
sure it is following the best practices.
And of course, what do we need at the
end? Our query. Okay, so now we have the
following query. And as you can see, we
have very annoying query where it is
really hard to read and that's because
the format and the styling of the query
is really bad. I don't want to speak
about the alignment and so on. But as
you can see, we have here lower cases,
we have here uppercase sometimes for the
keywords. And of course, if you are
developing and writing codes and you are
delivering something like this, it is
really not nice. So let's see how shipy
can fix it. Okay. So now after executing
the prompts, as you can see, now my
query looks way nicer. So first of all
all the keywords are uppercase and then
you can see our CTE are really nice to
read. We have here enough spacing. The
alignment of everything looks really
nice and the case is very clear and the
main query over here is as well easy to
read. So they done wonderful job styling
and formatting my code and here you have
like explanation what did change. So
first it is saying okay all the keywords
are capitalized the alignment of the
aliases and the columns and so on. So
with that we got a really nice style
formatted query that we can share with
others. Okay, moving on to the next one.
We can use AI in order to generate
documentations and as well to add
comments to my code. Creating
documentations and adding comments to
code is usually something very annoying
for the developers. And sadly I see a
lot of developers that they tend to not
add any comments or anything to their
code. And of course, this is really bad
because you are not thinking about other
developers that are reading your code.
No
god, no god, please no.
And since this process is annoying and
takes time, we can use the help of AI to
improve the speed of creating those
stuff. So let's check the following
prompt. It says the following SQL server
query lakes comments and documentation.
So we are saying first insert a leading
comment at the start of the query
describing its overall purpose. So this
is what we usually do. We add at the
start a short description about the
following code and then it should go and
add comments only where clarifications
is necessary and very important it
should avoid obvious statements. So it's
like indexing don't over commenting your
code and usually if you are creating
query for data analytics it's really
good to explain the business rules and
transformations that you are doing
inside your query and maybe another
documentations describing how the query
works. So for now we are asking to add
comments and documentations and of
course you have to go and add your
query. Okay. So now I just used this
prompt to one of my queries. Let's go
and check the results. Now the first
comment is the most important one
because it gives the overall purpose of
the whole query. So let's see what it's
saying. It's saying this query identify
customers based on their total salaries
and provide list of customers with their
total sales and their assigned segments.
So we have here like customer
segmentations. We have high value,
medium value and low value. So with this
comment we have the overall purpose of
the query and then we have the inline
comments like here. So it says it's
calculate the total sales for each
customer for the first CTE and now for
the second CTE we have here a full
description how the segment is built and
this is built of course from the
business rule of the customer segments.
So it say the high values for total
sales above like 100 and between and so
on. Well this case win is really easy.
So actually you can read it from the
case win. But if you have like complex
queries, it's really nice to have the
full text of the case win and then add
the main query. You can see here the
final output and the inline comments. So
as you can see it's really nice comments
inside our codes. And now the next one
we have like a document about the
business rule. And I totally agree with
the AI that the business rule is here
about the customer segmentations. So we
have here again very nice like short
documentations about the business rules
that we have and then we have another
document about how the query is working.
Well I think this is too much for small
query. We can go and ask the shibility
to make the documentation like shorter.
So as you can see we have a full
documentation about our query about our
business rules and we have really nice
comments in our code. All right. Now
moving on to the next prompts. It is
very important to improve the whole
project, the whole database. So what
we're going to do, we're going to go and
take our DDL scripts and give it to the
AI and start asking AI to optimize our
database DDL. So here there is a lot of
things that you can optimize with the
database. So let's check this prompts.
It's going to say the following SQL
server DDL script has to be optimized
and we ask the following task from the
AI. The first one is to check the
naming. So if you have a database where
you have a lot of tables and columns and
so on, you should be always working with
a specific naming convention. So here
just to make sure that the naming that
you are using is correct. Then what is
very important in DDLs is the data type.
Data types plays very crucial role in
optimizing your queries. So we are
telling the AI to check the data types
and whether they are optimized as well.
And now the next point is about the data
integrity. So if you are building a
relational database, you will have a lot
of primary keys and foreign keys and you
can tell the AI to check the integrity
of all those keys. The next point is
about indexes. Here you can tell the AI
to check the overall indexing that you
are using in the DDL scripts just to
make sure that you are not missing
anything and as well to check whether we
have duplicates. So it is really great
check and the last check is that to
check the normalizations of the table to
check the data model and whether there
is like any suggestions about splitting
tables and normalizing tables or they
are like some weird redundancy. Okay. So
now what we're going to do we're going
to let the chat activity to optimize the
DDL of the sales DB. So now we have here
the DDL of the customers employees
orders and so on. And after running it
we have the following results. So now we
have here again the DDL but optimized
one. And here the AI is adding comment
about the changes. So here it added the
auto incremental for the primary key.
And here for example a check that is not
a negative score and for the employees.
Here another check to make sure that the
birthday is not something in the future.
So all those constraints in order to
make sure that the quality of the table
is good. And here for the gender it is
restricting the valid values that could
be used inside this column and many
other stuff. And at the end we have like
the key changes. So about the naming
it's saying that we have to stick with
one naming convention. So here it did
understand that we are using the bascal
case and for those two columns we have
an issue like for example this product
it should called product name. And for
the data types I don't want to go in all
details. So here for example it says
don't use the int use a decimal for the
price and sales for the integrity saying
go and add foreign keys. I think for the
orders we don't have any foreign keys
that is used in the DDL. So the sht did
go and add all the foreign keys in the
DDL. So that was good. And now about the
indexing it says since we have primary
keys we will get automatically the
clustered indexing and the foreign keys
should get as well an index in order to
improve the queries and so on. So as you
can see there is a lot of optimizations
that could be done in our DDL. So now if
you are working on the project and you
have a DDL go ask the AI what could we
optimize I'm sure you will find
something and this is very critical
because having a solid and optimized DDL
improves of course the speed of the
queries. All right so now we come to
very useful use case of using AI for
your SQL projects and that is by using
AI to generate test data sets. It is
always really nice to have small data
sets in order to test the logic of your
query. Sometimes you are building a
logic that does not exist yet in your
database and of course if you are not
able to test the scenario that you are
developing it can be really bad and it
is always very painful process in order
to generate a data sets for your code
but of course now it is easier because
we have the help of AI. So let's check
the following prompt. It says I need the
data sets for testing the following SQL
server DDL. And now next we have to
specify for the AI different tasks. The
first one is we have to define the shape
of the data sets. So how do you want the
output? Do you want it as an insert
statements or do you want it as an excel
or a file and so on. Now the next
specifications I would like always to
have a data set that is realistic. So I
would like to always to have a data set
that is relevant and realistic not to
get dummy word data. So again he's like
only configurations about the data set.
The next configuration is that I would
like to have small data sets. Of course,
you can go and specify for charge the
exact size of your data sets. You can
say I would like to have like 100,000
rows or millions of rows and so on. So
you can define the size that you want.
For me, I would like to have like small
data sets. And now what is very
important that if you have multiple
tables in your DDL and those table have
primary keys and foreign keys, the data
set should be correct. So the AI should
generate keys that is joinable. So if
you go and join data together, you will
not get weird results. And of course,
you can go and keep adding
specifications whether you want to have
nulls or no nulls inside your data set.
So here for example, I'm saying don't
introduce any null values. And of course
at the end you have to go and give the
DDL for the AI. It could be one table or
the whole database. So you could
generate a data set for one table or
hundreds of tables. Okay. So now I'm
asking the SHT to create test data sets
for two tables. the employees and the
orders. Let's check the results. So now
we can see very small nice insert
statements for the table employees. So
we have over here like five employees
with the different informations. And now
for the table orders we have a lot of
columns. So as you can see we have four
orders. And what is very important is
that the salesperson ID comes from the
table employees. So as you can see we
have two and one where we have it
already in the employees. and the rest
of the informations we have like here
fake addresses and stuff. So with that
we have a very nice test data sets in
order to be inserted to our database to
test our queries. Of course we can go
and ask maybe to extend it maybe instead
of only four orders we can go with 20
orders and so on. So we can go and
change the size of it and here we have
some notes about the data itself. So it
is really amazing we are now generating
this data using our DLS. All right. So
now we have the following query and of
course we are using the SQL server and
let's say that you are migrating from
SQL server to MySQL. So let's ask
Shajbet to convert my code to MySQL. All
right. So after running it as we can see
now we have the same query but in MySQL.
So instead of the isnull we are using
Kawalis and here we are using the
concatenation instead of the plus
operator and instead of the get date in
MySQL we use the now function. And the
last thing we are using here top 10 but
in my scale we use limit 10. And here we
have really nice explanation about the
transition. So as you can see it is
amazing and if you are working on
companies and in projects this might
happen that there is like decision to
start migrating from one database to
another database and then your project
going to get a big task of migrating the
data migrating the DDLs and the queries
and everything and I really recommend
using the shad in order to help with the
migration otherwise this big task might
take really long time. So as you can see
this is really amazing how shad can
improve the speed of your
projects. Okay. Now in the next section
I'm going to show you the prompts that
you can use as a student or if you are
learning any new programming language.
Okay. So the first thing that you can do
with Shajibet is that you can ask it to
generate an SQL course. So you can ask
the shajibet to guide you step by step
in your journey learning any programming
language and you want to do it
completely onetoone with the AI. So
first it is very important in creating a
course is that to give enough context.
So in this example it is very short I'm
saying create an SQL course with a
detailed road map and agenda. But of
course you can go and give more
specifications. You can tell about your
current knowledge. You can specify which
database type you would like to work
with MySQL SQL server. So the more
context and details you give for the AI,
the better results you're going to get.
And then you go and configure your
course. So you can say for example start
with SQL fundamentals and advance to
complex topics. And as well we can say
make it beginner friendly and it is
important if it is the first time you
are learning about the topic. And now we
have to shape the focus of the course
like I'm saying here include topics that
is relevant for data analytics because
SQL is widely used in different topics
for data engineering data analytics and
it's really important in each course to
focus on use cases. So we are saying
focus on real world data analytics use
cases and scenarios and of course you
can go and add more details about your
course. Okay. So now I just asked the
shivity in order to make this course. So
now let's see the road map and the
structure of our course. So let's start
with the phase one with the SQL
fundamentals. So it start with the basic
select where and so on. Then the next
section we are talking about order by
group by and insert update delete. So
the basic stuff. Now in the road map you
get the phase two intermediate SQL. So
here we are talking about inner joins
few functions about the text the date
and the case statements and views. And
now to the phase three we have the
advanced SQL for analytics. So we have
the window functions, the CTE and data
cleaning using the null functions and
few transformations. Then we go to the
phase number four. Here in your road map
you start talking about real world use
cases. And here you have like multiple
projects. So as you can see this is
really solid road map in order to learn
SQL. And now in the next step what you
can do you can start deep diving into
each of those chapters until SQL to
start okay with the phase number one
with the week one to give more details.
All right. So now the next one once you
have the agenda and the road map
learning the SQL now you can go and
focus on specific chapter specific SQL
concepts. So in this prompt we are
saying the context first I want detailed
explanation about SQL window functions
and now after that we are specifying for
the AI the exact structure of the
explanation. So first it should explain
what are the window functions and maybe
as well to give an analogy in order to
understand exactly what is window
functions and after that it should
explain why we need them and when to use
the window functions. So once you
understand the basics then you can start
learning about the syntax of the window
functions and it should provide as well
few simple examples and at the end the
AI should show you the best or the most
frequently use cases used for the SQL
window functions. So this is the pattern
that I like in order to learn something
new. All right. So now let's see how the
AI going to explain the SQL window
functions. So as you can see it start
with the big title understanding SQL
with the functions. So we have here a
quick definition and then we have here
an analogy and the analogy about like a
teacher grading students. Well that's
nice because we have the rank function.
So you have here a nice analogy about
the window function and then we
understand why do we need the window
functions. Well I totally agree in order
to have row level details with the
aggregations. So you can do aggregations
while maintaining the raw level details
and as well you can do complex
calculations because you cannot do
everything with a group I there's
functions that only work with the window
and then we have some explanation when
to use them. So we see here for example
the syntax of the window function. So it
divided to a function partition order by
over and here few explanation about
that. Then we have few simple examples
with queries. So explaining the
different functions but not all of them.
Of course, you can go and ask the
schedule to extend the examples for all
functions. And now we can see the top
three use cases for the window
functions. So we use it in order to rank
the data and as well to build the
running totals and the moving average.
And at the end we have a summary. So as
you can see we have wonderful
explanation about the concept of the SQL
window functions. Okay, moving on to the
next one. And this one I use it very
frequently in my projects. There is like
in programming always different concepts
that are very close to each others and
sometimes it is confusing and naturally
clear what are the big differences
between them. So here I have for you a
prompt in order to compare different SQL
concepts. So now the prompt says I want
to understand the differences between
SQL window functions and the group by.
So both of them are used usually to
aggregate data in SQL and I would like
to understand more what are the
differences between them. So we define
for the AI the following task. Explain
the key differences between the two
concepts and then it's really important
to understand when to use what. So
describe when to use each concept with
examples and it's really nice to
understand as well the advantages and
the disadvantages of each concept and at
the end you would like maybe to get a
quick summarization about the
differences between those two functions
side by side in one table. Okay. So now
let's see how the share GBD can compare
those two concepts. So first we have
really nice table in order to see the
differences between those two. So for
example the output granularity it says
the wind function provides calculation
at the rowle details where the group by
provides aggregated results at the group
level detail and if you are talking
about the functions it allow ranking
running total moving average and the
group by it allows only the basic
aggregations like sum average count. So
this is really nice overview for the
differences. Then we have when to use
which concepts. So it's telling the
window function it is used if you want
role level details together with the
aggregations and here you have like a
nice example for the group by it says
you can use it for example when
summarizing data into categories like
here grouping up the data by the region
and then after that we have like pros
and cons for each concept. So the
advantage of the window function we get
all the rows and for the group I it is
like easier to understand and to use.
For the disadvantage of the window
function it is more complex. For the
group I the disadvantage is it removes
the details about the rows and at the
end we have like sideby-side comparison
between those two concepts. So as you
can see we have really nice full
detailed comparison between those two
SQL concepts. Practicing SQL with the
AI. Well, it is really not enough to
just read about something or maybe to
follow and watch a course in order to
learn something. You have always to
practice. And of course, it is really
hard to find a materials in order to
practice a new programming language. So,
we can do it like this. We give a rule
act as an SQL trainer and then a context
where we say and help me practice SQL
window functions and then we go and
configure this training this practice by
doing the following. We tell it to make
it interactive practicing. So the AI
provide a task and you give a solution.
And what else is important is that it
provides you a simple data set and of
course you can specify which data set
you want. Is it industrial data set or
healthcare or anything you want and then
we tell the AI give SQL task that
gradually increase in difficulty. So we
start with the basics until getting
advanced tasks. And you can tell the AI
to act as an SQL server and show the
results of your query. So you would like
to get as a result not only the correct
solution or feedback you want to see the
result of the query that you gives and
then finally the AI should go and review
your queries provide a feedback and
suggest improvements okay so now let's
start practicing I gave the prompt to
shity and now we have simple data sets
so it is very simple we have the sales
ID employee region sales dates and
amounts and then we have the first task
so it says write a query to rank
employees by their total sales. So here
you have like an example output and now
it says your turn. So the shad is
waiting for your answer. Okay. So now I
just prepared a query for it. Let's see
what can happen once I post it. Oh no, I
got some errors in the query. So let's
see what we have. So it says error in
the aggregations. You should use the
amount instead of sales. And it says
unnecessary partition by in the rank and
so on. So let's check the correct query.
So we have here the group pi and then we
have to do the window function without
using partition pi. So that was a
mistake and the result of this query
going to be this one. And here I have
really nice feedback about the first
task. So now it ask me about the next
task. So I'm going to say yes. So now we
have this task number two about the
running total. We have a task and we
have the data and we have now to write
query in order to solve the task. So my
friends it is nice right interactive and
not only SQL you can go and practice any
programming language. Now moving on to
the last prompt you can use AI in order
to prepare you for SQL interview. So
let's say that you are invited to an
interview and you would like to prepare
yourself for it. So you can do a quick
preparation together with the AI. So you
can say the following act as interviewer
and prepare me for SQL interview. And
now you can go and configure the
interview where you can say ask common
SQL interview questions and make it
interactive. So it provide a question
and then wait for you to answer and then
you can say gradually progress to
advanced topics. So from basics to
advanced and it is very important that
it evaluates your answer and give you a
feedback. So it is a really great way to
prepare for interviews and I really
recommended to do it and you can prepare
yourself not only for an SQL interview,
you can prepare yourself for an SQL
exam. Okay. Okay. So now let's prepare
for an ISQL interview. And here we have
the first question. Shibility says what
is the difference between where and
having. So now it is waiting for an
answer. We can say where filters data
before
aggregation and
having filters data after aggregation.
So let's check the answer. So here it is
giving me an example of a very solid
answer. But in general I have answered
correctly. So it says the answer is
correct. But the feedback says here
maybe the interviewer like needs more
details not only one sentence about the
differences. So here it is like
encouraging me to speak more and to give
more details as an answer but still the
answer is correct. So now let's go to
the next question. What we have here can
you explain the differences between
inner join and left join. So I hope you
know the answer but as you can see it is
very interactive and nice and I think
those questions are really relevant. So
if I'm interviewing someone I'm going to
go and ask this question. What is the
difference between where and having and
as well the differences between the
joint types. So this is amazing right? I
really recommend you if you have like an
interview go and prepare yourself using
shajbt and you can go and practice and
prepare yourself before going to the
interview. All right. So with that you
have learned how I use AI in order to
assist me while I'm coding using SQL.
And now my friends we come to the most
important chapter from the whole course.
You have now learned a lot of things
about SQL. A lot of advanced techniques,
a lot of functions, how to transform
data, how to aggregate data. But now
what you have to do is to take
everything and to apply it in SQL
projects. And those projects are not
only like easy projects. I bought
projects for you that is very similar to
the real project that I do in the
industry. So you will not learn only
like how to do project in SQL but as
well what are the main steps and how we
implement projects in real world. And
here I have for you three projects data
warehousing data exploration and
advanced data analytics. We're going to
start with the first one the data
warehousing projects. This one can be
amazing. So let's go and deep dive in
that. All right my friends. So now if
you want to do data analytics projects
using SQL we have three different types.
The first type of projects you can do
data warehousing. It's all about how to
organize, structure and prepare your
data for data analyszis. It is the
foundations of any data analytics
projects. And in the next step, you can
do exploratory data analyzes, EDA. And
all what you have to do is to understand
and cover insights about our data sets.
In this kind of project, you can learn
how to ask the right questions and how
to find the answer using SQL by just
using basic SQL skills. Now moving on to
the last stage where you can do advanced
analytics projects where you're going to
use advanced SQL techniques in order to
answer business questions like finding
trends over time, comparing the
performance, segmenting your data into
different sections and as well generate
reports for your stakeholders. So here
you will be solving real business
questions using advanced SQL techniques.
Now what we're going to do, we're going
to start with the first type of projects
SQL data warehousing where you will gain
the following skills. So first you will
learn how to do ETL ELT processing using
SQL in order to prepare the data. You
will learn as well how to build data
architecture, how to do data
integrations where we're going to merge
multiple sources together and as well
how to do data load and data modeling.
So if I got you interested, grab your
coffee and let's jump to the
projects. All right, my friends. So now
before we deep dive into the tools and
the cool stuff, we have first to have
good understanding about what is exactly
data warehouse why the companies try to
build such a data management system. So
now the question is what is a data
warehouse? I will just use the
definition of the father of the data
warehouse bill in a data warehouse is
subject-oriented integrated time variant
and nonvolatile collection of data
designed to support the management's
decision-making process. Okay, I I know
that might be confusing.
Subject-oriented it means that the
warehouses always focus on a business
area like the sales, customers, finance
and so on. Integrated because it goes
and integrate multiple source systems.
Usually you build a warehouse not only
for one source but for multiple sources.
Time variance it means you can keep
historical data inside the data
warehouse. Nonvolatile it means once the
data enter the data warehouse it is not
deleted or modified. So this is how
build inmon defined data warehouse.
Okay. So now I'm going to show you the
scenario where your company don't have a
real data management. So now let's say
that you have one system and you have
like one data analyst has to go to this
system and start collecting and
extracting the data and then he going to
spend days and sometimes weeks
transforming the raw data into something
meaningful. Then once they have the
reports they're going to go and share
it. And this data analyst is sharing the
report using an Excel. And then you have
like another source of data and you have
another data analyst that she is doing
maybe the same steps collecting the data
spending a lot of time transforming the
data and then share at the end like a
report and this time she is sharing the
data using PowerPoint and a third system
and the same story but this time he is
sharing the data using maybe PowerBI. So
now if the company works like this then
there is a lot of issues. First this
process it take two way long. I saw a
lot of scenarios where sometimes it
takes weeks and even months until the
employee manually generating those
reports. And of course, what can happen
for the users? They are consuming
multiple reports with multiple state of
the data. One report is 40 days old,
another one 10 days and a third one is
like 5 days. So it's going to be really
hard to make a real decision based on
this structure. A manual process is
always slow and stressful and the more
employees you involved in the process
the more you open the door for human
errors and errors of course in reports
leads to bad decisions and another issue
of course is handling the big data. If
one of your sources generating like
massive amount of data then the data
analyst going to struggle collecting the
data and maybe in some scenarios it will
not be anymore possible to get the data.
So the whole process can breaks and you
cannot generate anymore fresh data for
specific reports. And one last very big
issue with that. If one of your
stakeholders asks for an integrated
report from multiple sources, well good
luck with that because merging all those
data manually is very chaotic,
time-conuming and full of risk. So this
is just a picture. If a company is
working without a proper data
management, without a data leak, data
warehouse, data lake houses. So in order
to make real and good decisions, you
need data management. So now let's talk
about the scenario of a data warehouse.
So the first thing that's going to
happen is that you will not have your
data team collecting manually the data.
You're going to have a very important
component called ETL. ETL stands for
extract, transform and load. It is a
process that you do in order to extract
the data from the sources and then apply
multiple transformations on those
sources and at the end it loads the data
to the data warehouse and this one going
to be the single point of truth for
analyzes and reporting and it is called
data warehouse. So now what can happen
all your reports going to be consuming
this single point of truth. So with that
you create your multiple reports and as
well you can create integrated reports
from multiple sources not only from one
single source. So now by looking to the
right side it looks already organized
right and the whole process is
completely automated. There is no more
manual steps which of course it reduces
the human error and as well it is pretty
fast. So usually you can load the data
from the sources until the reports in
matter of hours or sometimes in minutes.
So there is no need to wait like weeks
and months in order to refresh anything.
And of course the big advantage is that
the data warehouse itself it is
completely integrated. So that means it
goes and bring all those sources
together in one place which makes it
really easier for reporting and not only
integrated you can build in the data
warehouse as well history. So we have
now the possibility to access historical
data and what is also amazing is that
all those reports having the same data
status. So all those reports can have
the same status maybe sometimes one day
old or something. And of course if you
have a modern data warehouse in cloud
platforms you can really easily handle
any big data sources. So no need to
panic if one of your sources is
delivering massive amount of data. And
of course in order to build the data
warehouse you need different types of
developers. So usually the one that
builds the ETL component and the data
warehouse is the data engineer. So they
are the one that is accessing the
sources, scripting the ATLs and building
the database for the data warehouse. And
now for the other part, the one that is
responsible for that is the data
analyst. They are the one that is
consuming the data warehouse, building
different data models and reports and
sharing it with the stakeholders. So
they are usually contacting the
stakeholders, understanding the
requirements and building multiple
reports based on the data warehouse. So
now if you have a look to those two
scenarios, this is exactly why we need
data management. Your data team is not
wasting time and fighting with the data.
They are now more organized and more
focused and with like a data warehouse
and you are delivering professional and
fresh reports that your company can
count on in order to make good and fast
decisions. So this is why you need a
data management like a data warehouse.
Think about data warehouse as a busy
restaurant. Every day different
suppliers bring in fresh ingredients,
vegetables, spices, meat, you name it.
They don't just use it immediately and
throw everything in one pot, right? They
clean it, shop it, and organize
everything and store each ingredients in
the right place, fridge or freezer. So,
this is the preparing phase. And when
the order comes in, they quickly grab
the prepared ingredients and create a
perfect dish and then serve it to the
customers of the restaurant. And this
process is exactly like the data
warehouse process. It is like the
kitchen where the raw ingredients, your
data are cleaned, sorted and stored. And
when you need a report or analyzes, it
is ready to serve up exactly like what
you
need. Okay. So now we're going to zoom
in and focus on the component ETL. If
you are building such a project, you're
going to spend almost 90% just building
this component, the ETL. So it is the
core element of the data warehouse and I
want you to have a clear understanding
what is exactly an ETL. So our data
exist in a source system. And now what
we want to do is is to get our data from
the source and move it to the target.
Source and target could be like database
tables. So now the first step that we
have to do is to specify which data we
have to load from the source. Of course
we can say that we want to load
everything but let's say that we are
doing incremental loads. So we're going
to go and specify a subset of the data
from the source in order to prepare it
and load it later to the target. So this
step in the ATL process we call it
extract. We are just identifying the
data that we need. We pull it out and we
don't change anything. It's going to be
like one to one like the source system.
So the extract has only one task to
identify the data that we have to pull
out from the source and to not change
anything. So we will not manipulate the
data at all. It can stay as it is. So
this is the first step in the ETL
process, the extract. Now moving on to
the stage number two. We're going to
take this extract data and we will do
some manipulations, transformations and
we're going to change the shape of those
data. And this process is really heavy
working. We can do a lot of stuff like
data cleansing, data integration and a
lot of formatting and data
normalizations. So a lot of stuff we can
do in this step. So this is the second
step in the ETL process, the
transformation. We're going to take the
original data and reshape it, transform
it into exactly the format that we need
into a new format and shapes that we
need for analyzes and reporting. Now,
finally, we get to the last step in the
ATL process. We have the load. So, in
this step, we're going to take this new
data and we're going to insert it into
the target. So, it is very simple. We're
going to take this prepared data from
the transformation step and we're going
to move it into its final destination,
the target like for example data
warehouse. So that's ETL in a nutshell.
First extract the raw data, then
transform it into something meaningful
and finally load it to a target where
it's going to make a difference. So
that's it. This is what we mean with the
ETL process. Now in real projects, we
don't have like only source and targets.
Our data architecture going to have like
multiple layers depend on your design
whether you are building a warehouse or
a data lake or a data warehouse. And
usually there are like different ways on
how to load the data between all those
layers. And in order now to load the
data from one layer to another one there
are like multiple ways on how to use the
ATL process. So usually if you are
loading the data from the source to the
layer number one like only extract the
data from the source and load it
directly to the layer number one without
doing any transformations because I want
to see the data as it is in the first
layer. And now between the layer number
one and the layer number two you might
go and use the full ETL. So we're going
to extract from the layer one, transform
it and then load it to the layer number
two. So with that we are using the whole
process the ATL. And now between layer
two and layer three we can do only
transformation and then load. So we
don't have to deal with how to extract
the data because it is maybe using the
same technology and we are taking all
data from layer 2 to layer three. So we
transform the whole layer 2 and then
load it to layer three. And now between
three and four you can use only the LM.
So maybe it's something like duplicating
and replicating the data and then you
are doing the transformation. So you
load to the new layer and then transform
it. Of course, this is not a real
scenario. I'm just showing you that in
order to move from source to a target,
you don't have always to use a complete
ETL. Depend on the design of your data
architecture. You might use only few
components from the ETL. Okay. So this
is how ETL looks like in real projects.
Okay. So now I would like to show you an
overview of the different techniques and
methods in the ETLs. We have wide range
of possibilities where you have to make
decisions on which one you want to apply
to your projects. So let's start first
with the extraction. The first thing
that I want to show you is we have
different methods of extraction. Either
you are going to the source system and
pulling the data from the source or the
source system is pushing the data to the
data warehouse. So those are the two
main methods on how to extract data. And
then we have in the extraction two
types. We have a full extraction
everything all the records from tables
and every day we load all the data to
the data warehouse or we make more
smarter one where we say we're going to
do an incremental extraction where every
day we're going to identify only the new
changing data. So we don't have to load
the whole thing only the new data we go
extract it and then load it to the data
warehouse. And in data extraction we
have different techniques. The first one
is like manually where someone has to
access a source system and extract the
data manually or we connect ourselves to
a database and we have then a query in
order to extract the data or we have a
file that we have to parse it to the
data warehouse or another technique is
to connect ourself to API and do their
calls in order to extract the data or if
the data is available in streaming like
in CFKA we can do eventbased streaming
in order to extract the data. Another
way is to use the change data capture
CDC is as well something very similar to
streaming or another way is by using web
scrabbing where you have a code that
going to run and extract all the
informations from the web. So those are
the different techniques and types that
we have in the extraction. Now if you
are talking on the transformation there
are wide range of different
transformations that we can do on our
data like for example doing data
enrichment where we add values to our
data sets or we do a data integration
where we have multiple sources and we
bring everything to one data model or we
derive new columns based on already
existing one. Another type of data
transformations we have the data
normalization. So the sources has values
that are like a code and you go and map
it to more friendly values for the
analyzers which is more easier to
understand and to use. Another
transformations we have the business
rules and logic depend on the business
you can define different criterias in
order to build like new columns. And
what belongs to transformations is the
data aggregation. So here we aggregate
the data to a different granularity and
then we have type of transformation
called data cleansing. There are many
different ways on how to clean our data.
For example, removing the duplicates,
doing data filtering, handling the
missing data, handling invalid values or
removing unwanted spaces, casting the
data types and detecting the outliers
and many more. So we have different
types of data cleansing that we can do
in our data warehouse and this is very
important transformation. So as you can
see we have different types of
transformations that we can do in our
data warehouse. Now moving on to the
load. So what do we have over here? We
have different processing types. So
either we are doing patch processing or
stream processing. Patch processing
means we are loading the data warehouse
in one big patch of data that's going to
run and load the data warehouse. So it
is only one time job in order to refresh
the content of the data warehouse and as
well the reports. So that means we are
scheduling the data warehouse in order
to load it in the day once or twice. And
the other type we have the stream
processing. So this means if there is
like a change in the source system,
we're going to process this change as
soon as possible. So we're going to
process it through all the layers of the
data warehouse once something changes
from the source system. So we are
streaming the data in order to have real
time data warehouse which is very
challenging things to do in data
warehousing. And if you are talking
about the loads we have two methods
either we are doing a full load or
incremental load. It's the same thing as
extraction right? So for the full load
in databases there are like different
methods on how to do it like for example
we truncate and then insert that means
we make the table completely empty and
then we insert everything from the
scratch or another one you are doing an
update insert we call it upsert. So we
can go and update all the records and
then insert the new one and another way
is to drop create and insert. So that
means we drop the whole table and then
we create it from scratch and then we
insert the data. It is very similar to
the truncate but here we are as well
removing and dropping the whole table.
So those are the different methods of
full loads. The incremental load we can
use as well the upserts. So update and
insert. So we're going to do an update
or insert statements to our tables. Or
if the source is something like a log,
we can do only insert. So we can go and
append the data always to the table
without having to update anything.
Another way to do incremental load is to
do a merge. And here it is very similar
to the upsert but as well with a delete.
So update, insert, delete. So those are
the different methods on how to load the
data to your tables. And one more thing
in data warehousing, we have something
called slowly changing dimensions. So
here it's all about the historicizations
of your table. And there are many
different ways on how to handle the
historiizations in your table. The first
type is sedd0. We say there is
notoriizations and nothing should be
changed at all. So that means you are
not going to update anything. The second
one which is more famous, it is the sedd
one. you are doing an overwrite. So that
means you are updating the records with
the new informations from the source
system by overwriting the old value. So
we are doing something like the upsert.
So update and insert but you are losing
of course history. Another one we have
the sedd2 and here you want to add
historiizations to your table. So what
we do each change that we get from the
source system that means we are
inserting new records and we are not
going to overwrite or delete the old
data. we are just going to make it
inactive and the new record going to be
active one. So there are different
methods on how to do historiizations as
well while you are loading the data to
the data warehouse. All right. So those
are the different types and techniques
that you might encounter in data
management projects. So now what I'm
going to show you quickly which of those
types we will be using in our projects.
So now if we are talking about the
extraction over here we will be doing a
pull extraction and about the full or
incremental it's going to be a full
extraction. And about the technique we
are going to be parsing files to the
data warehouse. And now about the data
transformations. Well, this one we will
cover everything all those types of
transformations that I'm showing you now
is going to be part of the project
because I believe in each data project
you will be facing those
transformations. Now if you have a look
to the load our project going to be
patch processing and about the load
methods we will be doing a full load
since we have full extraction and it's
going to be truncate and inserts. And
now about the historiizations we will be
doing the sedd one. So that means we
will be updating the content of the data
warehouse. So those are the different
techniques and types that we will be
using in our ETL process for this
project. All right. So with that we have
now clear understanding what is a data
warehouse and we are done with the
theory parts. So now the next step we're
going to start with the projects. The
first thing that we have to do is to
prepare our environment to develop the
projects. So let's start with
that. All right. So now we go to the
link in the description and from there
we're going to go to the downloads and
you can find all the materials of all
courses and projects. But the one that
we need now is the SQL data warehouse
projects. So let's go to the link and
here we have bunch of links that we need
for the projects. But the most important
one to get all data and files is this
one download all project files. So let's
go and do that. And after you do that
you're going to get a zip file where you
have there a lot of stuff. So let's go
and extract it. And now inside it if you
go over here you will find the
repository structure from git. And the
most important one here is the data
sets. So you have two sources the CRM
and the ARP. And in each one of them
there are three CSV files. So those are
the data set for the projects. For the
other stuffs don't worry about it. We
will be explaining that during the
project. So go and get the data and put
it somewhere at your PC where you don't
lose it. Okay. So now what else do we
have? We have here a link to the get
repository. So this is the link to my
repository that I have created through
the projects. So you can go and access
it. But don't worry about it. We're
going to explain the whole structure
during the projects and you will be
creating your own repository. And as
well we have the link to the notion.
Here we are doing the project
management. Here you're going to find
the main steps the main phases of the
SQL projects that we will do and as well
all the task that we will be doing
together during the projects. And now we
have links to the project tools. So if
you don't have it already go and
download the SQL server express. So it's
like a server that's going to run
locally at your PC where your database
going to live. Another one that you have
to download is the SQL Server Management
Studio. It is just a client in order to
interact with the database and there
we're going to run all our queries and
then link to the GitHub and as well link
to the draw AO if you don't have it
already go and download it. It is free
and amazing tool in order to draw
diagrams. So through the projects we
will be drawing data models the data
architecture a data lineage. So a lot of
stuff we'll be doing using this tool. So
go and download it. And the last thing
it is nice to have you have a link to
the notion where you can go and create
of course free accounts if you want to
build the project plan and as well
follow me by creating the project steps
and the projects tasks. Okay. So that's
all those are all the links for the
projects. So go and download all those
stuff create the accounts and once you
are ready then we continue with the
projects. All right. So now I hope that
you have downloaded all the tools and
created the accounts. Now it's time to
move to very important step that almost
all people skip while doing projects and
that is by creating the project plan and
for that we will be using the tool
notion. Notion is of course a free tool
and it can help you to organize your
ideas, your plans and resources all in
one place. I use it very intensively for
my private projects like for example
creating this course and I can tell you
creating a project plan is the key to
success. Creating a data warehouse
project is usually very complex. And
according to Gartner reports, over 50%
of data warehouse projects fail. In my
opinion about any complex project, the
key to success is to have a clear
project plan. So now at this phase of
the project, we're going to go and
create a rough project plan because at
the moment we don't have yet clear
understanding about the data
architecture. So let's go. Okay. So now
let's create a new page and let's call
it data warehouse projects. The first
thing is that we have to go and create
the main phases and stages of the
projects and for that we need a table.
So in order to do that hit slash and
then type database in line and then
let's go and call it something like data
warehouse epics and we're going to go
and hide it because I don't like it. And
then on the table we can go and rename
it like for example projects epics
something like that. And now what we're
going to do we're going to go and list
all the big task of the project. So an
epic is usually like a large task that
needs a lot of efforts in order to solve
it. So you can call it epics, stages,
phases of the project, whatever you
want. So we're going to go and list our
project steps. So let's start with the
requirements analyzes and then designing
data
architecture and another one we have the
project
initialization. So those are the three
big task in the project first. And now
what do we need? We need another table
for the small chunks of the tasks, the
subtasks and we're going to do the same
thing. So we're going to go and hit
slash and we're going to search for the
table in line and we're going to do the
same thing. So first we're going to call
it data warehouse tasks and then we're
going to hide it and over here we're
going to rename it and say this is the
project tasks. So now what we're going
to do, we're going to go to the plus
icon over here and then search for
relation. This one over here with the
arrow. And now we're going to search for
the name of the first table. So we
called it data warehouse eix. So let's
go and click it and we're going to say
as well two-way relation. So let's go
and add the relation. So with that we
got a field in the new table called data
warehouse eix. This comes from this
table and as well we have here data
warehouse tasks that comes from the
below table. So as you can see we have
linked them together. Now what I'm going
to do I'm going to take this to the left
side and then what we're going to do
we're going to go and select one of
those epics. Like for example let's take
design the data architecture. And now
what we're going to do, we're going to
go and break down this epic into
multiple tasks. Like for example, choose
data management approach. And then we
have another task. What we're going to
do, we're going to go and select as well
the same epic. So maybe the next step is
brainstorm and design the layers. And
then let's go to another epic for
example the project initialization. And
we say over here for example create get
repo prepare the structure. we can go
and make another one in the same epic.
Let's say we're going to go and create
the database and the schemas. So, as you
can see, I'm just defining the subtasks
of those epics. So, now what we're going
to do, we're going to go and add a
checkbox in order to understand whether
we have done the task or not. So, we go
to the plus and search for check. We
need a checkbox. And what we're going to
do, we're going to make it really small
like this. And with that, each time we
are done with the task, we're going to
go and click on it just to make sure
that we have done the task. Now, there
is one more thing that is not really
working nice and that is here. We're
going to have like a long list of tasks
and it's really annoying. So, what we're
going to do, we're going to go to the
plus over here and let's search for roll
up. So, let's go and select it. So, now
what we're going to do, we have to go
and select the relationship. It's going
to be the data warehouse task. And after
that, we're going to go to the property
and make it as a checkbox. So, now as
you can see in the first table, we are
saying how many tasks is closed. But I
don't want to show it like this. What we
can do, we're going to go to the
calculation and to the percent and then
percent checked. And with that, we can
see the progress of our project. And now
instead of the numbers, we can have
really nice bar. Great. So as well, we
can go and give it a name like progress.
So that's it. And we can go and hide the
data warehouse tasks. And now with that,
we have really nice progress bar for
each epic. And if we close all the tasks
of this epic, we can see that we have
reached 100%. So this is the main
structure. Now we can go and add some
cosmetics and rename stuff in order to
make things looks nicer. Like for
example, if I go to the tasks over here,
I can go and call it tasks and as well
go and change the icon to something like
this. And if you'd like to have an icon
for all those epics, what you're going
to do, we're going to go to the epic for
example design data architecture. And
then if you hover on top of the title,
you can see add an icon. And you can go
and pick any icon that you want. So for
example, this one. And now as you can
see, we have defined it here in the top.
And the icon going to be as well in the
below table. Okay. So now one more thing
that we can do for the project tasks is
that we can go and group them by the
epics. So if you go to the three dots
and then we go to groups and then we can
group up by the epics. As you can see
now we have like a section for each epic
and you can go and sort the epics if you
want. If you go over here sort then
manual and you can go over here and
start sorting the epics as you want. And
with that you can expand and minimize
each task. if you don't want to see
always all tasks in one go. So this is
really nice way in order to build like
data management for your projects. Of
course, in companies, we use
professional tools in order to do
projects like for example Gyra. But for
private personal projects that I do, I
always do it like this and I really
recommend you to do it not only for this
project, for any project that you are
doing. Cuz if you see the whole project
in one go, you can see the big picture
and closing tasks and doing it like
this. These small things going to makes
you really satisfied and keeps you
motivated to finish the whole project
and makes you proud. Okay friends, so
now I just went and added few icons, a
renamed stuff and as well more tasks for
each epic and this going to be our
starting point in the project and once
we have more informations we're going to
go and add more details on how exactly
we're going to build the data warehouse.
So at the start we're going to go and
analyze and understand the requirements
and only after that we're going to start
designing the data architecture and here
we have three tasks. First we have to
choose the data management approach and
after that we're going to do
brainstorming and designing the layers
of the data warehouse and at the end
we're going to go and draw a data
architecture. So with that we have clear
understanding how the data architecture
looks like and after that we're going to
go to the next epic where we're going to
start preparing our projects. So once we
have clear understanding of the data
architecture the first task here is to
go and create detailed project tasks. So
we're going to go and add more AP and
more tasks. And once we are done then
we're going to go and create the naming
conventions for the project just to make
sure that we have rules and standards in
the whole project. And next we're going
to go and create a repository in the git
and we're going to prepare as well the
structure of the repository so that we
always commit our work there. And then
we're going to start with the first
script where we're going to create a
database and schemas. So my friends this
is the initial plan for the project. Now
let's start with the first epic. We have
the requirements
analyzes. Now analyzing the requirement,
it is very important to understand which
type of data warehouse you're going to
go and build because there is like not
only one standard on how to build it.
And if you go blindly implementing the
data warehouse, you might be doing a lot
of stuff that is totally unnecessary and
you will be burning a lot of time. So
that's why you have to sit with the
stakeholders with the department and
understand what we exactly have to build
and depend on the requirements you
design the shape of the data warehouse.
So now let's go and analyze the
requirement of this project. Now the
whole project is splitted into two main
sections. The first section we have to
go and build a data warehouse. So this
is a data engineering task and we will
go and develop ETLs and data warehouse.
And once we have done that we have to go
and build analytics and reporting
business intelligence. So we're going to
do data analyszis. But now first we will
be focusing on the first part building
the data warehouse. So what do we have
here? The statement is very simple. It
says develop a modern data warehouse
using SQL server to consolidate sales
data enabling analytical reporting and
informed decision making. So this is the
main statements and then we have
specifications. The first one is about
the data sources. It says import data
from two source systems ERB and CRM and
they are provided as CSV files. And now
the second task is talking about the
data quality. We have to clean and fix
data quality issues before we do the
data analyzers because let's be real
there is no raw data that is perfect is
always messy and we have to clean that
up. Now the next task is talking about
the integration. So it says we have to
go and combine both of the sources into
one single userfriendly data model that
is designed for analytics and reporting.
So that means we have to go and merge
those two sources into one single data
model. And now we have here another
specifications. It says focus on the
latest data sets. So there is no need
for historiization. So that means we
don't have to go and build histories in
the database. And the final requirement
is talking about the documentation. So
it says provide clear documentations of
the data model. So that means the last
product of the data warehouse to support
the business users and the analytical
teams. So that means we have to generate
a manual that's going to help the users
that makes lives easier for the
consumers of our data. So as you can see
maybe this is very generic requirements
but it has a lot of informations already
for you. So it's saying that we have to
use the platform SQL server. We have two
source systems using the CSV files and
it sounds that we really have a bad data
quality in the sources and as well it
wants us to focus on building completely
new data model that is designed for
reporting and it says we don't have to
do historiization and it is expected
from us to generate documentations of
the system. So these are the
requirements for the data engineering
part where we're going to go and build a
data warehouse that fulfill these
requirements. All right. Right. So with
that we have analyzed the requirements
and as well we have closed the first
easiest ebick. So we are done with this.
Let's go and close it. And now let's
open another one. Here we have to design
the data architecture and the first task
is to choose data management approach.
So let's
go. Now designing the data architecture
it is exactly like building a house. So
before construction starts, an
architect's going to go and design a
plan, a blueprint for the house. How the
rooms will be connected, how to make the
house functional, safe and wonderful.
And without this blueprint from the
architects, the builders might create
something unstable, inefficient or maybe
unlivable. The same goes for data
projects. A data architect is like a
house architecture. They design how your
data will flow, integrate and be
accessed. So as data architects we make
sure that the data warehouse is not only
functioning but also scalable and easy
to maintain. And this is exactly what we
will do now. We will play the role of
the data architect and we will start
brainstorming and designing the
architecture of the data warehouse. So
now I'm going to show you a sketch in
order to understand what are the
different approaches in order to design
a data architecture. And this phase of
the projects usually is very exciting
for me because this is my main role in
data projects. I am a data architect and
I discuss a lot of different projects
where we try to find out the best design
for the projects. All right. So now
let's
go. Now the first step of building a
data architecture is to make a very
important decision to choose between
four major types. The first approach is
to build a data warehouse. It is very
suitable if you have only structured
data and your business want to build
solid foundations for reporting and
business intelligence. And another
approach is to build a data leak. This
one is way more flexible than a data
warehouse where you can store not only
structured data but as well semi and
unstructured data. We usually use this
approach if you have mixed types of data
like database tables, logs, images,
videos and your business want to focus
not only on reporting but as well on
advanced analytics or machine learning
but it's not that organized like a data
warehouse and data leaks if it's too
much unorganized and turns into data
swamp and this is where we need the next
approach. So the next one we can go and
build data lakehouse. So it is like a
mix between data warehouse and data
lake. You get the flexibility of having
different types of data from the data
lake but you still want to structure and
organize your data like we do in the
data warehouse. So you mix those two
words into one and this is a very modern
way on how to build that architecture
and this is currently my favorite way of
building data management system. Now the
last and very recent approach is to
build data mesh. So this is a little bit
different. Instead of having centralized
data management system the idea now in
the data mesh is to make it
decentralized. You cannot have like one
centralized data management system
because always if you say centralized
then it means bottleneck. So instead you
have multiple departments and multiple
domains where each one of them is
building a data product and sharing it
with others. So now you have to go and
pick one of those approaches and in this
project we will be focusing on the data
warehouse. So now the question is how to
build the data warehouse. Well there is
as well four different approaches on how
to build it. The first one is the
enimmon approach. So again you have your
sources and the first layer you start
with the staging where the row data is
landing and then the next layer you
organize your data in something called
enterprise data warehouse where you go
and model the data using the third
normal format. It's about like how to
structure and normalize your tables. So
you are building a new integrated data
model from the multiple sources. And
then we go to the third layer. It's
called the data marts where you go and
take like small subset of the data
warehouse and you design it in a way
that is ready to be consumed from
reporting and it focus on only one topic
like for example the customers sales or
products and after that you go and
connect your BI tool like PowerBI or
Tableau to the data marts. So with that
you have three layers to prepare the
data before reporting. Now moving on to
the next one we have the Kimple
approach. He says you know what building
this enterprise data warehouse it is
wasting a lot of time. So what we can do
we can jump immediately from the stage
layer to the final data because building
this enterprise data warehouse it is a
big struggle and usually waste a lot of
time. So he always want you to focus and
building the data ms quickly as
possible. So it is faster approach than
in but with the time you might get chaos
in the data MS cuz you are not always
focusing in the big picture and you
might be repeating same transformations
and integrations in different data ms.
So there is like trade-off between the
speed and consistent data warehouse. Now
moving on to the third approach we have
the data vault. So we still have the
stage and the data marts but it says we
still need this central data warehouse
in the middle but this middle layer
we're going to bring more standards and
rules. So it tells you to split this
middle layer into two layers the row
vault and the business vault. In the row
vault you have the original data but in
the business vault you have all the
business rules and transformations that
prepares the data for the data marks. So
that vault it is very similar to the
inmon but it brings more standards and
rules to the middle layer. Now I'm going
to go and add a fourth one that I'm
going to call it medallion architecture
and this one is my favorite one because
it is very easy to understand and to
build. So it says you're going to go and
build three layers bronze, silver and
gold. The bronze layer it is very
similar to the stage but we have
understood with the time that the stage
layer is very important because having
the original data as it is it going to
helps a lot by traceability and finding
issues. Then the next layer we have the
silver layer. It is where we do
transformations data cleansing but we
don't apply yet any business rules. Now
moving on to the last layer the gold
layer. It is as well very similar to the
data marts but there we can build
different type of objects not only for
reporting but as well for machine
learning for AI and for many different
purposes. So they are like business
ready objects that you want to share as
a data products. So those are the four
approaches that you can use in order to
build a data warehouse. So again if you
are building a data architecture you
have to specify which approach you want
to follow. So at the start we said we
want to build a data warehouse and then
we have to decide between those four
approaches on how to build a data
warehouse and in this project we will be
using the medallion architecture. So
this is a very important question that
you have to answer as the first step of
building a data architecture. All right.
So with that we have decided on the
approach. So we can go and mark it as
done. The next step we're going to go
and design the layers of the data
warehouse.
Now there is like not 100% standard way
and rules for each layer. What you have
to do as a data architects you have to
define exactly what is the purpose of
each layer. So we start with the bronze
layer. So we say it's going to store row
and unprocessed data as it is from the
sources. And why we are doing that it is
for traceability and debugging. If you
have a layer where you are keeping the
raw data, it is very important to have
the data as it is from the sources
because we can go always back to the
bronze layer and investigate the data of
specific source if something goes wrong.
So the main objective is to have raw
untouched data that's going to helps you
as a data engineer by analyzing the root
cause of issues. Now moving on to the
server layer. It is the layer where
we're going to store clean and
standardized data and this is the place
where we're going to do basic
transformations in order to prepare the
data for the final layer. Now for the go
layer it's going to contain business
ready data. So the main goal here is to
provide data that could be consumed by
business users and analysts in order to
build reporting and analytics. So with
that we have defined the main goal for
each layer. Now next what I would like
to do is to define the object types and
since we are talking about a data
warehouse in database we have here
generally two types either a table or a
view. So we are going for the bronze
layer and the silver layer with tables
but for the gold layer we are going with
the views. So the best practice says for
the last layer in your data warehouse
make it virtual using views. It going to
gives you a lot of dynamic and of course
speed in order to build it since we
don't have to make a load process for
it. And now the next step is that we're
going to go and define the load method.
So in this project I have decided to go
with the full load using the method of
truncating and inserting. It is just
faster and way easier. So we're going to
say for the bronze layer we're going to
go with the full load. And you have to
specify as well for the silver layer as
well. We're going to go with the full
load. And of course for the views we
don't need any load process. So each
time you decide to go with tables you
have to define the load methods with our
full load, incremental loads and so on.
Now we come to the very interesting part
the data transformations. Now for the
bronze layer, it is the easiest one
about this topic because we don't have
any transformations. We have to commit
ourself to not touch the data, do not
manipulate it, don't change anything. So
it's going to stay as it is. If it comes
bad, it's going to stay bad in the
bronze layer. And now we come to the
silver layer where we have the heavy
lifting. As we committed in the
objective, we have to make clean and
standardized data. And for that we have
different types of transformations. So
we have to do data cleansing, data
standardizations, data normalizations.
We have to go and derive new columns and
data enrichment. So there are like bunch
of transformations that we have to do in
order to prepare the data. Our focus
here is to transform the data to make it
clean and following standards and try to
push all business transformations to the
next layer. So that means in the god
layer we will be focusing on business
transformations that is needed for the
consumers for the use cases. So what we
do here we do data integrations between
source system we do data aggregations we
apply a lot of business logics and rules
and we build a data model that is ready
for for example business intelligence.
So here we do a lot of business
transformations and in the silver layer
we do basic data transformations. So it
is really here very important to make
the fine decisions what type of
transformations to be done in each layer
and make sure that you commit to those
rules. Now the next aspect is about the
data modeling in the bronze layer and
the silver layer. We will not break the
data model that comes from the source
system. So if the source system deliver
five tables, we're going to have here
like five tables and as well in the
silver layer. We will not go and
denormalize or normalize or like make
something new, we're going to leave it
exactly like it comes from the source
system because what we're going to do,
we're going to build the data model in
the gold layer. And here you have to
define which data model you want to
follow. Are you following the star
schema, the snowflake or are you just
making aggregated objects? So you have
to go and make a list of all data models
types that you're going to follow in the
gold layer. And at the end, what you can
specify in each layer is the target
audience. And this is of course very
important decision. In the bronze layer,
you don't want to give access to any end
user. It is really important to make
sure that only data engineers access the
bronze layer. It makes no sense for data
analysts or data scientists to go to the
bad data because you have a better
version for that in the silver layer. So
in the silver layer of course the data
engineers have to have an access to it
and as well the data analysts and the
data scientists and so on but still you
don't give it to any business user that
can't deal with the raw data model from
the sources because for the business
users you're going to get a better layer
for them and that is the go layer. So in
the gold layer it is suitable for the
data analyst and as well the business
users because usually the business users
don't have a deep knowledge on the
technicality of the server layer. So if
you are designing multiple layers you
have to discuss all those topics and
make clear decision for each layer. All
right my friends. So now before we
proceed with the design I want to tell
you a secret principle concept that each
data architect must know and that is the
separation of concerns. So what is that?
As you are designing an architecture,
you have to make sure to break down the
complex system into smaller independent
parts and each part is responsible for a
specific task. And here comes the magic.
The component of your architecture must
not be duplicated. So you cannot have
two parts are doing the same thing. So
the idea here is to not mix everything.
And this is one of the biggest mistakes
in any big projects and I have shown
that almost everywhere. So a good data
architects follow this concept this
principle. So for example if you are
looking to our data architecture we have
already done that. So we have defined
unique set of tasks for each layer. So
for example we have said in the server
layer we do data cleansing but in the
gold layer we do business
transformations and with that you will
not be allowing to do any business
transformations. In the server layer and
the same thing goes for the gold layer.
You don't do in the gold layer any data
cleansing. So each layer has its own
unique tasks and the same thing goes for
the bronze layer and the silver layer.
You do not allow to load data from the
source systems directly to the silver
layer because we have decided the
landing layer. The first layer is the
bronze layer otherwise you will have
like set of source systems that are
loaded first to the bronze layer and
another set is skipping the layer and
going to the silver and with that we
have overlapping. You are doing data
ingestion in two different layers. So my
friends, if you have this mindset,
separation of concerns, I promise you,
you're going to be a top data architect.
So think about it. All right, my
friends. So with that, we have designed
the layers of the data warehouse. We can
go ahead close it. The next step, we're
going to go to DYO and start drawing the
data
architecture. So there is like no one
standard on how to build a data
architecture. You can add your style and
the way that you want. So now the first
thing that we have to show in that
architecture is the different layers
that we have. The first layer is the
source system layer. So let's go and
take a box like this and make it a
little bit bigger. And I'm just going to
go and make the design. So I'm going to
remove the fill and make the line dotted
one. And after that I'm going to go and
change maybe the color to something like
this gray. So now we have like a
container for the first layer. And then
we have to go and add like a text on top
of it. So what I'm going to do, I'm
going to take another box. Let's go and
type inside it sources. And now I'm
going to go and style it. So I'm going
to go to the text and make it maybe 24.
And then remove the lines like this.
Make it a little bit smaller and put it
on top. So this is the first layer. This
is where the data come from. And then
the data going to go inside a data
warehouse. So I'm just going to go and
duplicate this one. This one is the data
warehouse. All right. So now the third
layer what it going to be? It's going to
be the consumers. who will be consuming
this data warehouse. So I'm going to put
another box and say this is the consume
layer. Okay. So those are the three
containers. Now inside the data
warehouse, we have decided to build it
using the medallion architecture. So
we're going to have three layers inside
the warehouse. So I'm going to take
again another box. I'm going to call
this one. This is the bronze layer. And
now we have to go and put a design for
it. So I'm going to go with this color
over here. And then the text and maybe
something like 20. And then make it a
little bit smaller and just put it here.
And beneath that we're going to have the
component. So this is just a title of a
container. So I'm going to have it like
this. Remove the text from inside it.
And remove the filling. So this
container is for the bronze layer. Let's
go and duplicate it for the next one. So
this one going to be the silver layer.
And of course, we can go and change the
coloring to gray because it is silver.
And as well the lines and remove the
filling. Great. And now maybe I'm going
to make the font as bold. All right. Now
the third layer going to be the gold
layer. And we have to go and pick a
color for that. So style and here we
have like something like yellow. The
same thing for the container. I remove
the filling. So with that we are showing
now the different layers inside our data
warehouse. Now those containers are
empty. What we're going to do, we're
going to go inside each one of them and
start adding contents. So now in the
sources, it is very important to make it
clear what are the different types of
source systems that you are connecting
to the data warehouse because in real
project there are like multiple types.
You might have a database, API, files,
cafka and here it's important to show
those different types. In other projects
we have folders and inside those folders
we have CSV files. So now what you have
to do we have to make it clear in this
layer that the input for our project is
CSV file. So it really depend how you
want to show that. I'm going to go over
here and say maybe folder and then I'm
going to go and take the folder and put
it here inside and then maybe search for
file more results and go pick one of
those icons. For example, I'm going to
go with this one over here. So I'm going
to make it smaller and add it on top of
the folder. So with that we make it
clear for everyone seeing the
architecture that the sources is not a
database is not an API it is a file
inside the folder. So now very important
here to show is the source systems. What
are the sources that is involved in the
project. So here what we're going to do
we're going to go and give it a name.
For example we have one source called
CRM like this and maybe make the icon
and we have another source called ERP.
So we're going to go and duplicate it
put it over here and then rename it ERP.
So now it is for everyone clear. We have
two sources for this project and the
technology is used is simply a file. So
now what we can do as well we can go and
add some descriptions inside this box to
make it more clear. So what I'm going to
do, I'm going to take a line because I
want to split the description from the
icons something like this and make it
gray. And then below it, we're going to
go and add some text and we're going to
say is CSV file. And the next point and
we can say the interface is simply files
in folder. And of course you can go and
add any specifications and explanation
about the sources. If it is a database,
you can say the type of the database and
so on. So that we made it in the data
architecture clear what are the sources
of our data warehouse. And now the next
step what we're going to do we're going
to go and design the content of the
bronze silver and gold. So I'm going to
start by adding like an icon in each
container. It is to show about that we
are talking about database. So what
we're going to do we're going to go and
search for database and then more
result. More results. I'm going to go
with this icon over here. So let's go
and make it bigger. Something like this.
Maybe change the color of dots. So,
we're going to have the bronze and as
well here the silver and the gold. So,
now what we can do, we're going to go
and add some arrows between those
layers. So, we're going to go over here.
So, we can go and search for arrow and
maybe go and pick one of those. Let's go
and put it here. And we can go and pick
a color for that. Maybe something like
this. And adjust it. So, now we're going
to have this nice arrow between all the
layers just to explain the direction of
our architecture, right? So we can read
it from left to right and as well
between the go layer and the consume.
Okay. So now what I'm going to do next
we're going to go and add one statement
about each layer the main objective. So
let's go and grab a text and put it
beneath the database and we're going to
say for example for the bronze layer
it's going to be the row data. Maybe
make the text bigger so you are the row
data. And then the next one in the
silver you are clean standard data. And
then the last one for the gold we can
say business
ready data. So with that we make the
objective clear for each layer. Now
below all those icons what we're going
to do we're going to have a separator
again like this. Make it like colored.
And beneath it we're going to add the
most important specifications of this
layer. So let's go and add those
separators in each layer. Okay. So now
we need a text below it. Let's take this
one here. So what is the object type of
the bronze layer? That's going to be a
table and we can go and add the load
methods. We say this is patch
processing. Since we are not doing
streaming, we can say it is a full load.
We are not doing incremental load. So we
can say here trank and insert. And then
we add one more section maybe about the
transformations. So we can say no
transformations. And one more about the
data model. We're going to say none as
is. And now what I'm going to do I'm
going to go and add those specifications
as well for the silver and gold. So here
what we have discussed the object type
the load process the
transformations and whether we are
breaking the data model or not the same
thing for the gold layer. So I can say
with that we have really nice layering
of the data warehouse and what we are
left is with the consumers over here you
can go and add the different use cases
and tools that can access your data
warehouse like for example I'm adding
here business intelligence and reporting
maybe using PowerBI or Tableau or you
can say you can access my data warehouse
in order to do at analyzes using the SQL
queries and this is what we're going to
focus on the projects after we build the
data warehouse and as well you can offer
it for machine learning purposes and of
course it It's really nice to add some
icons in your architecture and usually I
use this nice websites called flat icon.
It has really amazing icons that you can
go and use it in your architecture. Now,
of course, we can go and keep adding
icons and stuff to explain the data
architecture and as well the system.
Like for example, it is very important
here to say which tools you are using in
order to build this data warehouse. Is
it in the cloud? Are using Azure datab
bricks or maybe snowflake? So we're
going to go and add for our project the
icon of SQL server since we are building
this data warehouse completely in the
SQL server. So for now I'm really happy
about it. As you can see we have now a
plan right. All right guys so with that
we have designed the data architecture
using the doyo and with that we have
done the last step in this epic and now
with that we have a design for the data
architecture and we can say we have
closed this epic. Now let's go to the
next one. We will start doing the first
step to prepare our project. And the
first task here is to create a detailed
project
plan. All right, my friends. So now it's
clear for us that we have three layers
and we have to go and build them. So
that means our big epics going to be
after the layers. So here I have added
three more epics. So we have build
bronze layer, build silver layer and
gold layer. And after that I went and
start defining all the different tasks
that we have to follow in the projects.
So at the start we will be analyzing
then coding and after that we're going
to go and do testing and once everything
is ready we're going to go and document
stuff and at the end we have to commit
our work in the get repo. All those
epics are following the same like
pattern in the tasks. So as you can see
now we have a very detailed project
structure and now things are more
cleared for us how we're going to build
the data warehouse. So with that we are
done from this task and now the next
task we have to go and define the naming
convention of the
projects. All right. So now at this
phase of the projects we usually define
the naming conventions. So what is that?
It is set of rules that you define for
naming everything in the projects
whether it is a database, schema,
tables, stored procedures, folders,
anything. And if you don't do that at
the early phase of the projects, I
promise you chaos can happen because
what going to happen? You will have
different developers in your projects
and each of those developers have their
own style of course. So one developer
might name a table dimension customers
where everything is lowerase and between
them underscore and you have another
developer creating another table called
dimension products but using the camel
case. So there is no separation between
the words and the first character is
capitalized and maybe another one using
some prefixes like
dim categories. So we have here like a
shortcut of the dimension. So as you can
see there are different designs and
styles and if you leave the door open
what can happen in the middle of the
project you will notice okay everything
looks inconsistent and you can define a
big task to go and rename everything
following a specific rule. So instead of
wasting all this time at this phase you
go and define the naming conventions and
let's go and do that. So we usually
start with a very important decision and
that is which naming convention we going
to follow in the whole project. So you
have different cases like the camel
case, the Pascal case, the kebab case,
and the snake case. And for this
project, we're going to go with the
snake case where all the letters of a
word going to be lowercased. And the
separation between words going to be an
underscore. For example, a table name
called customer info. Customer is
lowercased. Info is as well lowercased.
And between them an underscore. So this
is always the first thing that you have
to decide for your data projects. The
second thing is to decide the language.
So for example, I work in Germany and
there is always like a decision that we
have to make whether we use Germany or
English. So we have to decide for our
project which language we're going to
use. And a very important general rule
is that avoid reserved words. So don't
use a square reserved word as an object
name like for example table. Don't give
a table name as a table. So those are
the general principles. So those are the
general rules that you have to follow in
the whole project. This applies for
everything for tables, columns, stored
procedures, any names that you are
giving in your scripts. Now moving on,
we have specifications for the table
names. And here we have different set of
rules for each layer. So here the rule
says source system underscore entity. So
we are saying all the tables in the
bronze layer should start first with the
source system name like for example CRM
or ARB and after that we have an
underscore and then at the end we have
the entity name or the table name. So
for example we have this table name CRM.
So that means this table comes from the
source system CRM and then we have the
table name the entity name customer
info. So this is the rule that we're
going to follow in naming all tables in
the bronze layer. Then moving on to the
silver layer, it is exactly like the
bronze because we are not going to
rename anything. We are not going to
build any new data model. So the naming
going to be one one to one like the
bronze. So it is exactly the same rules
as the bronze. But if we go to the gold
here, since we are building new data
model, we have to go and rename things.
And since as well we are integrating
multiple sources together, we will not
be using the source system name in the
tables because inside one table you
could have multiple sources. So the rule
says all the names must be meaningful
business aligned names for the tables
starting with the category prefix. So
here the rule says it start with
category then underscore and then
entity. Now what is category? We have in
the code layer different types of
tables. So we could build a table called
a fact table. Another one could be a
dimension. A third type could be an
aggregation or a report. So we have
different types of tables and we can
specify those types as a prefix at the
start. So for example we are saying here
effect sales. So the category is fact
and the table name called sales. And
here I just made like a table with
different type of patterns. So we could
have a dimension. So we say it start
with the dim underscore for example
dimim customers or products. And then we
have another type called fact table. So
it start with fact underscore or
aggregated table where we have the first
three characters like aggregating the
customers or the sales monthly. So as
you can see as you are creating a naming
convention you have first to make it
clear what is the rule describe each
part of the rule and start giving
examples. So with that we make it clear
for the whole team which names they
should follow. So we talked here about
the table naming convention. Then you
can as well go and make naming
convention for the columns. Like for
example in the code layer we're going to
go and have surrogate keys. So we can
define it like this. The surrogate key
should start with a table name and then
underscore a key. Like for example we
can call it customer key. It is a
surrogate key in the dimension
customers. The same thing for technical
columns. As a data engineer, we might
add our own columns to the tables that
don't come from the source system. And
those columns are the technical columns
or sometimes we call them metadata
columns. Now, in order to separate them
from the original columns that comes
from the source system, we can have like
a prefix for that. Like for example, the
rule says if you are building any
technical or metadata columns, the
column should start with DWH underscore
and then the column name. For example,
if you want the metadata load dates, we
can have
DWH load dates. So with that, if anyone
sees that column starts with DWH, we
understand this data comes from a data
engineer. And we can keep adding rules
like for example the store procedure
over here. If you are making an ETL
script, then it should start with the
prefix load underscore and then the
layer. For example, the store procedure
that is responsible for loading the
bronze going to be called load bronze.
and for the silver load underscore
silver. So those are currently the rules
for the start procedure. So this is how
I do it usually in my projects. All
right my friends. So with that we have a
solid naming conventions for our
projects. So this is done and now the
next step is that we're going to go to
git and you will create a brand new
repository and we're going to prepare
its structure. So let's
go. All right. Right. So now we come to
as well important step in any projects
and that's by creating the G repository.
So if you are new to Git, don't worry
about it. It is simpler than it sounds.
So it's all about to have a safe place
where you can put your codes that you
are developing and you will have the
possibility to track everything happens
to the codes and as well you can use it
in order to collaborate with your team
and if something goes wrong you can
always roll back. And the best part here
once you are done with the project you
can share your repository as a part of
your portfolio and it is really amazing
thing if you are applying for a job by
showcasing your skills that you have
built a data warehouse by using well
doumented get repository. So now let's
go and create the repository of the
project. Now we are at the overview of
our account. So the first thing that we
have to do is to go to the repositories
over here and then we're going to go to
this green button and click on new. The
first thing that we have to do is to
give the repository name. So let's call
it SQL data warehouse project and then
here we can go and give it a
description. So for example I'm saying
building a modern data warehouse with
SQL server. Now the next option whether
you want to make it public and private.
I'm going to leave it as a public and
then let's go and add here a readme
file. And then here about the license we
can go over here and select the MIT. MIT
license gives everyone the freedom of
using and modifying your code. Okay. So
I think I'm happy with the setup. Let's
go and create the repository. And with
that we have our brand new repository.
Now the next step that I usually do is
to create the structure of the
repository. And usually I always follow
the same patterns in any projects. So
here we need few folders in order to put
our files right. So what I usually do I
go over here to add file create a new
file and I start creating the structure
over here. So the first thing is that we
need data sets then slash and with that
the repository going to understand this
is a folder not a file and then you can
go and add anything like here
placeholder just an empty file this just
going to help me to create the folders
so let's go and commit so commit the
changes and now if you go back to the
main projects you can see now we have a
folder called data sets so I'm going to
go and keep creating stuff so I will go
and create the documents placeholder
commit the changes and then I'm going to
go and create the scripts
placeholder and the final one what I
usually add is the
tests something like
this. So that as you can see now we have
the main folders of our repository. Now
what I usually do the next that I'm
going to go and edit the main readme. So
you can see it over here as well. So
what we're going to do, we're going to
go inside the readme and then we're
going to go to the edit button here and
we're going to start writing the main
information about our project. This is
really depend on your style. So you can
go and add whatever you want. This is
the main page of your repository. And
now as you can see the file name here is
MD. It stands for markdown. It is just
an easy and friendly format in order to
write a text. So if you have like
documentations, you are writing a text.
It is a really nice format in order to
organize it, structure it and it is very
friendly. So what I'm going to do at the
start I'm going to give a few
description about the project. So we
have the main title and then we have
like a welcome message and what this
repository is about. And in the next
section maybe we can start with the
project requirements and then maybe at
the end you can say a few words about
the licensing and few words about you.
So as you can see it's like the homepage
of the project and the repository. So
once you are done we're going to go and
commit the changes. And now if you go to
the main page of the repository you can
see always the folder and files at the
start and then below it we're going to
see the informations from the readme. So
again here we have the welcome statement
and then the projects requirements and
at the end we have the licensing and
about me. So my friends that's it. We
have now a repository and we have now
the main structure of the project and
through the projects as we are building
the data warehouse we're going to go and
commit all our work in this repository.
Nice, right? All right. So with that we
have now your repository ready and as we
go in the project we will be adding
stuff to it. So this step is done and
now the last step finally we're going to
go to the SQL server and we're going to
write our first script where we're going
to create a database and schemas.
All right. Now the first step is we have
to go and create a brand new database.
So now in order to do that first we have
to switch to the database master. So you
can do it like this. Use master and
semicolon. And if you go and execute it
now we are switched to the master
database. It is a system database in SQL
server where you can go and create other
databases. And you can see here from the
toolbar that we are now logged into the
master database. Now the next step we
have to go and create our new database.
So we're going to say create database
and you can call it whatever you want.
So I'm going to go with data warehouse
semicolon. Let's go and execute it. And
with that we have created our database.
Let's go and check it from the object
explorer. Let's go and refresh. And you
can see our new data warehouse. This is
our new database. Awesome. Right now to
the next step we're going to go and
switch to the new database. So we're
going to say use data
warehouse and semicolon. So let's go and
switch to it. And you can see now we are
logged into the data warehouse database.
And now we can go and start building
stuff inside this data warehouse. So now
the first step that I usually do is I go
and start creating the schemas. So what
is schema? Think about it. It's like a
folder or a container that helps you to
keep things organized. So now as we
decided in the architecture we have
three layers, bronze, silver, gold. And
now we're going to go and create for
each layer a schema. So let's go and do
that. We're going to start with the
first one. Create schema. And the first
one is bronze. So let's do it like this.
And a semicolon. Let's go and create the
first schema. Nice. So we have new
schema. Let's go to our database. And
then in order to check the schemas, we
go to the security and then to the
schemas over here. And as you can see,
we have the bronze. And if you don't
find it, you have to go and refresh the
whole schemas. and then you will find
the new schema. Great. So now we have
the first schema. Now what we're going
to do, we're going to go and create the
others two. So I'm just going to go and
duplicate it. So the next one going to
be the silver and the third one going to
be the gold. So let's go and execute
those two together. We will get an error
and that's because we are not having the
go in between. So after each command,
let's have a go. And now if I highlight
the silver and gold and then execute, it
will be working. the go in SQL it is
like separator. So it tells SQL first
execute completely the first command
before go to the next one. So it is just
separator. Now let's go to our schemas
refresh and now we can see as well we
have the gold and the silver. So with
that we have now a database. We have the
three layers and we can start developing
each layer
individually. Okay. So now let's go and
commit our work in the git. So now since
it is a script and code we're going to
go to the folder scripts over here and
then we're going to go and add a new
file let's call it in it
database.sql and now we're going to go
and paste our code over here. So now I
have done few modifications like for
example before we create the database we
have to check whether the database
exists. This is an important step if you
are recreating the database otherwise if
you don't do that you will get an error
where it's going to say the database
already exists. So first it is checking
whether the database exists then it
drops it. I have added few comments like
here we are saying creating the data
warehouse creating the schemas and now
we have a very important step. We have
to go and add a header comment at the
start of each script. To be honest after
3 months from now you will not be
remembering all the details of this
script. And adding a comment like this
it is like a sticky note for you later
once you visit this script again. And it
is as well very important for the other
developers in the team because each time
you open the scripts the first question
going to be what is the purpose of this
script because if you or anyone in the
team open the file the first question
going to be what is the purpose of this
scripts why we are doing this stuff. So
as you can see here we have a comment
saying this script creates a new data
warehouse after checking if it already
exists. If the database exists, it's
going to drop it and recreate it. And
additionally, it's going to go and
create three schemas, bronze, silver,
gold. So that it gives clarity what this
script is about. And it makes everyone
life easier. Now, the second reason why
this is very important to add is that
you can add warnings and especially for
this script, it is very important to add
these notes because if you run this
script, what's going to happen? It's
going to go and destroy the whole
database. Imagine someone open this
script and run it. Imagine an admin open
this script and run it in your database.
Everything going to be destroyed and all
the data will be lost and this can be a
disaster if you don't have any backup.
So with that we have nice header
comments and we have added few comments
in our code and now we are ready to
commit our code. So let's go and commit
it. And now we have our script in the
git as well. And of course if you are
doing any modifications make sure to
update the changes in the git. Okay my
friends. So with that we have an empty
database and schemas and we are done
with this task and as well we are done
with the whole epic. So we have
completed the project initialization and
now we're going to go to the interesting
stuff. We will go and build the bronze
layer. So now the first task is to
analyze the source systems. So let's
go. All right. So now the big question
is how to build the bronze layer. So
first thing first we do analyzing. As
you are developing anything, you don't
immediately start writing a code. So
before we start coding the bronze layer,
what we usually do is we have to
understand the source system. So what I
usually do, I make an interview with the
source system experts and ask them many
many questions in order to understand
the nature of the source system that I'm
connecting to the data warehouse. And
once you know the source systems, then
we can start coding. And the main focus
here is to do the data ingestion. So
that means we have to find a way on how
to load the data from the source into
the data warehouse. So it's like we are
building a bridge between the source and
our target system the data warehouse.
And once we have the code ready, the
next step is we have to do data
validation. So here comes the quality
control. It is very important in the
bronze layer to check the data
completeness. So that means we have to
compare the number of records between
the source system and the bronze layer
just to make sure we are not losing any
data in between. And another check that
we will be doing is the schema checks
and that's to make sure that the data is
placed on the right position. And
finally we don't have to forget about
documentation and committing our work in
the G. So this is the process that we're
going to follow to build the bronze
layer. All right my friends. So now
before connecting any source systems to
our data warehouse, we have to make very
important step is to understand the
sources. So how I usually do it, I set
up a meeting with the source systems
expert in order to interview them to ask
them a lot of stuff about the source.
And gaining this knowledge is very
important because asking the right
question will help you to design the
correct scripts in order to extract the
data and to avoid a lot of mistakes and
challenges. And now I'm going to show
you the most common questions that I
usually ask before connecting anything.
Okay. So we start first by understanding
the business context and the ownership.
So I would like to understand the story
behind the data. I would like to
understand who is responsible for the
data, which IT departments and so on.
And then it's nice to understand as well
what business process it supports. Does
it support the customer transactions,
the supply chain, logistics or maybe
finance reporting. So with that you can
understand the importance of your data.
And then I ask about the system and data
documentation. So having documentations
from the source is your learning
materials about your data. And it's
going to saves you a lot of time later
when you are working and designing maybe
new data models. And as well I would
like always to understand the data model
for the source system. And if they have
like descriptions of the columns and the
tables, it's going to be nice to have
the data catalog. This can helps me a
lot in the data warehouse. How I'm going
to go and join the tables together. So
with that you get a solid foundations
about the business context, the
processes and the ownership of the data.
And now in the next step we're going to
start talking about the technicality. So
I would like to understand the
architecture and as well the technology
stack. So the first question that I
usually ask is how the source system is
storing the data. Do we have the data on
the on-prem like in SQL server, Oracle
or is it in the cloud like Azure, AWS
and so on. And then once we understand
that then we can discuss what are the
integration capabilities like how I'm
going to go and get the data. Do the
source system offer APIs maybe cafka or
they have only like file extractions or
they're going to give you like a direct
connection to the database. So once you
understand the technology that you're
going to use in order to extract the
data then we're going to deep dive into
more technical questions and here we're
going to understand how to extract the
data from the source system and then
load it into the data warehouse. So the
first things that we have to discuss
with the experts can we do an
incremental load or a full load and then
after that we're going to discuss the
data scope the historicizations do we
need all data do we need only maybe 10
years of the data are there histories
already in the source system or should
we build it in the data warehouse and so
on and then we're going to go and
discuss what is the expected size of the
extracts are we talking here about
megabytes gigabytes terabytes and this
is very important to understand whether
we have the right tools and platform to
connect that source system and then I
try to understand whether there are any
data volume limitations like if you have
some old source systems they might
struggle a lot with performance and so
on. So if you have like an ETL that is
extracting large amount of data you
might bring the performance down of the
source system. So that's why you have to
try to understand whether there are any
limitations for your extracts and as
well other aspects that might impact the
performance of the source system. This
is very important. If they give you an
access to the database, you have to be
responsible that you are not bringing
the performance of the database down.
And of course, very important question
is to ask about the authentication and
the authorization like how you going to
go and access the data in the source
system. Do you need any tokens, keys,
password and so on. So those are the
questions that you have to ask if you
are connecting a new source system to
the data warehouse. And once you have
the answers for those questions, you can
proceed with the next steps to connect
the sources to the data warehouse. All
right, my friends. So with that, you
have learned how to analyze a new source
systems that you want to connect to your
data warehouse. So this step is done and
now we're going to go back to coding
where we're going to write scripts in
order to do the data ingestion from the
CSV files to the pros
layer. And let's have a quick look again
to our bronze layer specifications. So
we just have to load the data from the
sources to the data warehouse. We're
going to build tables in the bronze
layer. We are doing a full load. So that
means we are truncating and then
inserting the data. There will be no
data transformations at all in the
bronze layer. And as well we will not be
creating any data model. So this is the
specifications of the bronze layer. All
right. Right now in order to create the
DDL script for the bronze layer creating
the tables of the bronze we have to
understand the metadata the structure
the schema of the incoming data and here
either you ask the technical experts
from the source system about these
informations or you can go and explore
the incoming data and try to define the
structure of your tables. So now what
we're going to do we're going to start
with the first source system the CRM. So
let's go inside it and we're going to
start with the first table the customer
info. Now if you open the file and check
the data inside it, you see we have a
header information and that is very good
because now we have the names of the
columns that are coming from the source
and from the content you can define of
course the data types. So let's go and
do that. First we're going to say create
table and then we have to define the
layer. It's going to be the bronze. And
now very important we have to follow the
naming convention. So we start with the
name of the source system. It is CRM
underscore and then after that the table
name from the source system. So it's
going to be the cost underscore info. So
this is the name of our first table in
the bronze layer. Then the next step we
have to go and define of course the
columns. And here again the column names
in the bronze layer going to be one to
one exactly like the source system. So
the first one going to be the ID and I
will go with the data type integer. Then
the next one going to be the key invar
char and the length I will go with 50.
[Music]
And the last one going to be the create
date. It's going to be date. So with
that we have covered all the columns
available from the source system. So
let's go and check. And yes the last one
is the create date. So that's it for the
first table. Now a semicolon of course
at the end. Let's go and execute it. And
now we're going to go to the object
explorer over here. Refresh. And we can
see the first table inside our data
warehouse. Amazing right? So now next
what you have to do is to go and create
a DDL statement for each file for those
two systems. So for the CRM we need
three DDLs and as well for the other
system the ERP we have as well to create
three DDLs for the three files. So at
the end we're going to have in the
bronze layer six tables six DTLs. So now
pause the video go create those DDLs. I
will be doing the same as well and we
will see you soon.
[Music]
All right. So now I hope you have
created all those details. I'm going to
show you what I have just created. So
the second table in the source CRM we
have the product informations and the
third one is the sales details. Then we
go to the second system and here we make
sure that we are following the naming
convention. So first the source system
ERB and then the table name. So the
second system was really easy. You can
see we have only here like two columns
and for the customers like only three
and for the categories only four
columns. All right. So after defining
those stuff of course we have to go and
execute them. So let's go and do that.
And then we go to the object explorer
over here. Refresh the tables. And with
that you can see we have six empty
tables in the bronze layer. And with
that we have all the tables from the two
source systems inside our database. But
still we don't have any data. And you
can see our naming convention is really
nice. You see the first three tables
comes from the CRM source system and
then the other three comes from the ERB.
So we can see in the bronze layer the
things are really splitted nicely and
you can identify quickly which table
belong to which source system. Now there
is something else that I usually add to
the DDL script is to check whether the
table exists before creating. So for
example, let's say that you are renaming
or you would like to change the data
type of specific field. If you just go
and run this query, you will get an
error because the database going to say
we have already this table. So in other
databases you can say create or replace
table. But in the SQL server you have to
go and build a TSQL logic. So it is very
simple. First we have to go and check
whether the object exists in the
database. So we say if object ID and
then we have to go and specify the table
name. So let's go and copy the whole
thing over here and make sure you get
exactly the same name as the table name.
So there you see like space. I'm just
going to go and remove it. And then
we're going to go and define the object
type. So it's going to be the U. It
stands for user. It is the user defined
tables. So if this table is not null. So
that means the database did find this
object in the database. So what's going
to happen? We say go and drop the table.
So the whole thing again and semicolon.
So again if the table exist in the
database is not null then go and drop
the table and after that go and create
it. So now if you go and highlight the
whole thing and then execute it it will
be working. So first drop the table if
it exist then go and create the table
from scratch. Now what you have to do is
to go and add this check before creating
any table inside our database. So it's
going to be the same thing for the next
table and so on. I went and added all
those checks for each table and what can
happen if I go and execute the whole
thing it going to work. So with that I'm
recreating all the tables in the bronze
layer from the
scratch. Now the methods that we're
going to use in order to load the data
from the source to the data warehouse is
the bulk inserts. Pulk insert is a
method of loading massive amount of data
very quickly from files like CSV files
or maybe a text file directly into a
database. It is not like the classical
normal inserts where it's going to go
and insert the data row by row but
instead the bulk insert is one operation
that's going to load all the data in one
go into the database and that's what
makes it very fast. So let's go and use
this method. Okay. Okay, so now let's
start writing the script in order to
load the first table in the source CRM.
So we're going to go and load the table
customer info from the CSV file to the
database table. So the syntax is very
simple. We're going to start with saying
bulk insert. So with that SQL understand
we are doing not a normal insert, we are
doing a bulk insert and then we have to
go and specify the table name. So it is
bronze dot CRM cost info. So now we have
to specify the full location of the file
that we are trying to load in this
table. So now what we have to do is to
go and get the path where the file is
stored. So I'm going to go and copy the
whole path and then add it to the bulk
insert exactly like where the data
exists. So for me it is in CSQL data
warehouse project data set in the source
CRM. And then I have to specify the file
name. So it's going to be like cost
info. CSV. You have to get it exactly
like the path of your files otherwise it
will not be working. So after the path
now we come to the with clause. Now we
have to tell the SQL server how to
handle our file. So here comes the
specifications. There is a lot of stuff
that we can define. So let's start with
the very important one is the row
header. Now if you check the content of
our files you can see always the first
row includes the header information of
the file. So those informations are
actually not the data. It's just the
column names. The actual data starts
from the second row and we have to tell
the database about this information. So
we're going to say first row is actually
the second row. So with that we are
telling SQL to skip the first row in the
file. We don't need to load those
informations because we have already
defined the structure of our table. So
this is the first specifications. The
next one which is as well very important
in loading any CSV file is the separator
between fields. The delimiter between
fields. So it's really depend on the
file structure that you are getting from
the source. As you can see all those
values are splitted with a comma and we
call this comma as a file separator or a
delimter and I saw a lot of different
CSVs like sometime they use a semicolon
or a pipe or special character like a
hash and so on. So you have to
understand how the values are splitted
and in this file it's splitted by the
comma and we have to tell SQL about this
info. It's very important. So we're
going to say filled terminator and then
we're going to say it is the comma and
basically those two informations are
very important for SQL in order to be
able to read your CSV file. Now there
are like many different options that you
can go and add. For example, tape lock.
It is an option in order to improve the
performance where you are locking the
entire table during loading it. So as
SQL is loading the data to this table,
it going to go and lock the whole table.
So that's it for now. I'm just going to
go and add the semicolon and let's go
and insert the data from the file inside
our bronze table. Let's execute it. And
now we can see SQL did insert around
80,000 rows inside our table. So it is
working. We just loaded the file into
our database. But now it is not enough
to just write this script. you have to
test the quality of your bronze table
especially if you are working with
files. So let's go and just do a simple
select. So from our new
table and let's run it. So now the first
thing that I check is do we have data
like in each column? Well yes as you can
see we have data and the second thing is
do we have the data in the correct
column. This is very critical as you are
loading the data from a file to a
database. Do we have the data in the
correct column? So for example, here we
have the first name which of course
makes sense and here we have the last
name. But what could happen and this
mistakes happens a lot is that you find
the first name informations inside the
key and as well you see the last name
inside the first name and the status
inside the last name. So there is like
shifting of the data and this data
engineering mistake is very common if
you are working with CSV files and there
are like different reasons why it
happens. Maybe the definition of your
table is wrong or the field separator is
wrong. Maybe it's not a comma, it's
something else or the separator is a bad
separator because sometimes maybe in the
keys or in the first name there is a
comma and the SQL is not able to split
the data correctly. So the quality of
the CSV file is not really good and
there are many different reasons why you
are not getting the data in the correct
column. But for now everything looks
fine for us. And the next step is that
I'll go and count the rows inside this
table. So let's go and select that. So
we can see we have
18,493. And now what we can do, we can
go to our CSV file and check how many
rows do we have inside this file. And as
you can see we have
18,494. We are almost there. There is
like one extra row inside the file. And
that's because of the header. the first
header information is not loaded inside
our table and that's why always in our
tables we're going to have one less row
than the original files. So everything
looks nice and we have done this step
correctly. Now if I go and run it again
what's going to happen we will get
duplicates inside the bronze layer. So
now we have loaded the file like twice
inside the same table which is not
really correct. The method that we have
discussed is first to make the table
empty and then load truncate and then
insert. In order to do that before the
bulk inserts, what we're going to do,
we're going to say truncate table and
then we're going to have our
table and that's it with a semicolon. So
now what we are doing is first we are
making the table empty and then we start
loading from the scratch. We are loading
the whole content of the file inside the
table and this is what we call full
load. So now let's go and mark
everything together and execute. And
again if you go and check the content of
the table you can see we have only
18,000 rows. Let's go and run it again.
The count of the bronze layer you can
see we still have the 18,000. So each
time you run this script now we are
refreshing the table customer info from
the file into the database table. So we
are refreshing the bronze layer table.
So that means if there's like now any
changes in the file, it will be loaded
to the table. So this is how we do a
full load in the bronze layer by
truncating the table and then doing the
inserts. And now of course what we have
to do is to pause the video and go and
write the same script for all six files.
So let's go and do
[Music]
that. Okay, back. So I hope that you
have as well written all those scripts.
So I have the three tables in order to
load the first source system and then
three sections in order to load the
second source system. And as I'm writing
those scripts, make sure to have the
correct path. So for the second source
system, you have to go and change the
path for the other folder. And as well,
don't forget the table name on the
bronze layer is different from the file
name because we start always with the
source system name with the files. We
don't have that. So now I think I have
everything is ready. So let's go and
execute the whole thing. Perfect.
Awesome. So everything is working. Let
me check the messages. So we can see
from the message how many rows are
inserted in each table. And now of
course the task is to go through each
table and check the
content. So that means now we have
really nice script in order to load the
bronze layer. And we will use this
script in daily basis. every day we have
to run it in order to get a new content
to the data warehouse. And as we learned
before, if you have like a script of SQL
that is frequently used, what we can do,
we can go and create a stored procedure
from those scripts. So let's go and do
that. It's going to be very simple.
We're going to go over here and say
create or alter procedure. And now we
have to define the name of the S
procedure. I'm going to go and put it in
the schema bronze because it belongs to
the bronze layer. So then we're going to
go and follow the naming convention. The
source procedure start with load
underscore and then the bronze layer. So
that's it about the name and then very
important we have to define the begin
and as well the end of our skill
statements. So here is the begin and
let's go to the end and say this is the
end. And then let's go highlight
everything in between and give it one
push with tab. So with that it is easier
to read. So now next what we're going to
do we're going to go and execute it. So
let's go and create this store
procedure. And now if you want to go and
check your store procedure, you go to
the database and then we have here a
folder called programmability. And then
inside it we have start procedure. So if
you go and refresh, you will see our new
stored procedure. Let's go and test it.
So I'm going to go and have a new query.
And what we're going to do, we're going
to say execute
bronze.load bronze. So let's go and
execute it. And with that, we have just
loaded completely the bronze layer. So
as you can see SQL did go and insert all
the data from the files to the bronze
layer. It is way easier than each time
running those scripts of course. All
right. So now the next step is that as
you can see the output message it is
really not having a lot of informations.
The message of your ETL sold procedure
it will not be really clear. So that's
why if you are writing an ETL script
always take care of the messaging of
your code. So let me show you a nice
design. Let's go back to our store
procedure. So now what we can do we can
go and divide the message based on our
code. So now we can start with the
message for example over here let's say
print and we say what we are doing with
this store procedure we are loading the
bronze liar. So this is the main message
the most important one and we can go and
play with the separators like this. So
we can say print and now we can go and
add some nice separators like for
example the equals at the start and at
the end just to have like a section. So
this is just a nice message at the
start. So now by looking to our code we
can see that our code is splitted into
two sections. The first section we are
loading all the tables from the source
system CRM and the second section is
loading the tables from the ERP. So we
can split the prints by the source
system. So let's go and do that. So
we're going to say print and we're going
to say loading CRM tables. This is for
the first section. And then we can go
and add some nice separators like the
one. Let's take the minus. And of
course, don't forget to add semicolons
like me. So, we're going to have
semicolon for each prints. Same thing
over here. I will go and copy the whole
thing because we're going to have it at
the start and as well at the ends. Let's
go copy the whole thing for the second
section. So, for the ERP, it starts over
here. And we're going to have it like
this. And we're going to call it loading
ERP. So, with that in the output, we can
see nice separation between loading each
source system. Now we go to the next
step where we go and add like a print
for each action. So for example here we
are truncating the table. So we say
print and now what we can do we can go
and add two arrows and we say what we
are doing. So we are truncating the
table and then we can go and add the
table name in the message as well. So
this is the first action that we are
doing and we can go and add another
print for inserting the data. So we can
say inserting data into and then we have
the table name. So with that in the
output we can understand what SQL is
doing. So let's go and repeat this for
all other tables. Okay. So I just added
all those prints and don't forget the
semicolon at the end. So I would say
let's go and execute it and check the
output. So let's go and do that and then
maybe at the start just to have quick
output execute our stored procedure like
this. So let's see now if you check the
output you can see things are more
organized than before. So at the start
we are reading okay we are loading the
bronze layer. Now first we are loading
the source system CRM and then the
second section is for the ERP and we can
see the actions. So we are truncating
inserting truncating inserting for each
table and as well the same thing for the
second source. So as you can see it is
nice and cosmetic but it's very
important as you are debugging any
errors. And speaking of errors, we have
to go and handle the errors in our store
procedure. So let's go and do that. It's
going to be the first thing that we do.
We say begin try and then we go to the
end of our script and we say before the
last end we say end try and then the
next thing we have to add the catch. So
we're going to say begin catch and end
catch. So now first let's go and
organize our code. I'm going to take the
whole codes and give it one more push
and as well the begin try. So it is more
organized and as you know the try and
catch going to go and execute the try
and if there is like any errors during
executing this script the second section
going to be executed. So the catch will
be executed only if the SQL failed to
run the try. So now what we have to do
is to go and define for SQL what to do
if there's like an error in your code.
And here we can do multiple stuff like
maybe creating a logging tables and add
the messages inside this table or we can
go and add some nice messaging to the
output like for example we can go and
add like a section again over here. So
again some equals and we can go and
repeat it over here and then add some
content in between. So we can start with
something like to say error
accord during loading bronze layer and
then we can go and add many stuff like
for example we can go and add the error
message and here we can go and call the
function
error message and we can go and add as
well for example the error number. So
error number and of course the output of
this going to be a number but the error
message here is a text. So we have to go
and change the data type. So we're going
to do a cast as invar like this and then
there is like many functions that you
can add to the output like for example
the error state and so on. So you can
design what can happen if there is an
error in the ETL. Now what else is very
important in each ATL process is to add
the duration of each like step. So for
example, I would like to understand how
long it takes to load this table over
here. But looking to the output, I don't
have any informations how long is taking
to load my tables. And this is very
important because as you are building
like a big data warehouse, the ETL
process going to take long time and you
would like to understand where is the
issue, where is the bottleneck, which
table is consuming a lot of time to be
loaded. So that's why we have to add
those informations as well to the output
or even maybe to protocol it in a table.
So let's go and add as well this step.
So we're going to go to the start and
now in order to calculate the duration
you need the starting time and the end
time. So we have to understand when we
start loaded and when we ended loading
the table. So now the first thing is we
have to go and declare the variables. So
we're going to say declare and then
let's make one called start time and the
data type of this going to be the date
time. I need exactly the second when it
started and then another one for the end
time. So another variable end time and
as well the same thing date time. So
with that we have declared the variables
and the next step is to go and use them.
So now let's go to the first table to
the customer info and at the start we're
going to say set start
time equal to get date. So we will get
the exact time when we start loading
this table. And then let's go and copy
the whole thing and go to the end of
loading over here. So we're going to say
set this time the end time equal as well
to the get dates. So with that now we
have the values of when we start loading
this table and when we completed loading
the table. And now the next step is we
have to go and print the duration those
informations. So over here we can go and
say print and we can go and have as
again the same design. So two arrows and
we can say very simply load duration and
then double points and a space. And now
what we have to do is to calculate the
duration and we can do that using the
date and time function date diff in
order to find the interval between two
dates. So we're going to say plus over
here and then use date diff. And here we
have to define three arguments. First
one is the unit. So here you can define
second, minute, hours and so on. So
we're going to go with the second and
then we're going to define the start of
the interval. It's going to be the start
time. And then the last argument it
going to be the end of the boundary.
It's going to be the end time. And now
of course the output of this going to be
a number that's why we have to go and
cast it. So we're going to say cast as
invar and then we're going to close it
like this and maybe at the end we're
going to say
plus space seconds in order to have a
nice message. So again what we have done
we have declared the two variables and
we are using them at the start we are
getting the current date and time and at
the end of loading the table we are
getting the current date and time and
then we are finding the differences
between them in order to get the load
duration and in this case we are just
printing this information and now we can
go of course and add some nice separator
between each table so I'm going to go
and do it like this just few minuses not
a lot of stuff so now what we have to do
is to go and add this mechanism for each
table in order to measure the speed of
the ETL for each one of
[Music]
them. Okay. So now I have added all
those configurations for each table and
let's go and run the whole thing now. So
let's go and edit the store procedure
this and we're going to go and run it.
So let's go and execute. So now as you
can see we have here one more info about
the load durations and it is everywhere
I can see we have zero seconds and
that's because it is super fast of
loading those informations we are doing
everything locally at PC so loading the
data from files to database going to be
mega fast but of course in real projects
you have like different servers and
networking between them and you have
millions of rows in the tables of course
the duration going to be not like 0
seconds things going to be slower and
now you can see easily how long it takes
to load each of your tables. And now of
course what is very interesting is to
understand how long it takes to load the
whole bronze layer. So now your task is
as well to print at the end informations
about the whole patch. How long it took
to load the bronze
[Music]
layer. Okay, I hope we are done. Now I
have done it like this. We have to
define two new variables. So the start
time of the batch and the end time of
the batch. And the first step in the
start procedure is to get the date and
time informations for the first
variable. And exactly at the end the
last thing that we do in the start
procedure, we're going to go and get the
date and time informations for the end
time. So we say again set get date for
the patch and time. And then all what we
have to do is to go and print a message.
So we are saying loading bronze layer is
completed and then we are printing total
load duration and the same thing with a
date difference between the patch start
time and the end time and we are
calculating the seconds and so on. So
now what we have to do is to go and
execute the whole thing. So let's go and
refresh the definition of the start
procedure and then let's go and execute
it. So in the output we have to go to
the last message and we can see loading
bronze layer is completed and the total
load duration is as well 0 seconds
because the execution time is less than
1 second. So with that you are getting
now a feeling about how to build an ETL
process. So as you can see the data
engineering is not all about how to load
the data. It's how to engineer the whole
pipeline. how to measure the speed of
loading the data. What can happen if
there is like an error and to print each
step in your ETL process and make
everything organized and cleared in the
output and maybe in the logging just to
make debugging and optimizing the
performance way easier. And there's like
a lot of things that we can add. We can
add the quality measures and stuff. So
we can add many stuff to our ETL script
to make our data warehouse professional.
All right, my friends. So with that we
have developed a code in order to load
the bronze layer and we have tested that
as well. And now in the next step we're
going to go back to draw because we want
to draw a diagram about the data flow.
So let's
go. So now what is a data flow diagram?
We're going to draw a simple visual in
order to map the flow of your data where
it come from and where it ends up. So we
want just to make clear how the data
flows through different layers of your
projects. And that's help us to create
something called the data lineage. And
this is really nice especially if you
are analyzing an issue. So if you have
like multiple layers and you don't have
a real data lineage or flow, it's going
to be really hard to analyze the scripts
in order to understand the origin of the
data and having this diagram going to
improve the process of finding issues.
So now let's go and create one. Okay. So
now back to draw and we're going to go
and build the flow diagram. So we're
going to start first with the source
system. So, let's build the layer. I'm
going to go and remove the fill dot it.
And then we're going to go and add like
a box saying sources and we're going to
put it over here. Increase the size 24
and as well without any lines. Now, what
do we have inside the sources? We have
like folder and files. So, let's go and
search for a folder icon. I'm going to
go and take this one over here and say
you are the CRM. And we can as well
increase the size. And we have another
source. We have the
ERP. Okay. So, this is the first layer.
Let's go and now have the bronze layer.
So, we're going to go and grab another
box. And we're going to go and make the
coloring like this. And instead of auto,
maybe take the hatch, maybe something
like this, whatever, you know. So,
rounded. And then we can go and put on
top of it like the title. So, we can say
you are the bronze layer. and increase
as well the size of the font. So now
what we're going to do, we're going to
go and add boxes for each table that we
have in the bronze layer. So for
example, we have the sales details. We
can go and make it a little bit smaller.
So maybe 16 and not bold. And we have
other two tables from the CRM. We have
the customer info and as well the
product info. So those are the three
tables that comes from the CRM. And now
what we're going to do, we're going to
go and connect now the source CRM with
those three tables. So what we're going
to do, we're going to go to the folder
and start making arrows from the folder
to the bronze layer like this. And now
we have to do the same thing for the ERP
source. So as you can see the data flow
diagram shows us in one picture the data
lineage between the two layers. So here
we can see easily those three tables
actually comes from the CRM and as well
those three tables in the bronze layer
are coming from the ERP. I understand if
we have like a lot of tables it's going
to be a huge mess. But if you have like
small or medium data warehouse building
those diagrams going to make things
really easier to understand how
everything is flowing from the sources
into the different layers in your data
warehouse. All right. So with that we
have the first version of the data flow.
So this step is done and the final step
is to commit our code in the get
repo. Okay. So now let's go and commit
our work. Since it is scripts, we're
going to go to the folder scripts. And
here we're going to have like script for
the bronze, silver, and gold. That's why
maybe it makes sense to create a folder
for each layer. So let's go and start
creating the bronze folder. So I'm going
to go and create a new file. And then
I'm going to say bronze slash. And then
we can have the DDL script of the bronze
layer SQL. So now I'm going to go and
paste the DDL codes that we have
created. So those six tables and as
usual at the start we have a comment
where we are explaining the purpose of
this script. So we are saying this
scripts creates tables in the bronze
schema. And by running this scripts you
are redefining the DDL structure of the
bronze tables. So let's have it like
that. And I'm going to go and commit the
changes. All right. So now as you can
see inside the scripts we have a folder
called bronze and inside it we have the
DDL script for the bronze layer and as
well in the bronze layer we're going to
go and put our start procedure. So we're
going to go and create a new file let's
call it proc load bronze dossql and then
let's go and paste our script and as
usual I have put it at the start an
explanation about the store procedure.
So we are saying this third procedure
going to go and load the data from the
CSV files into the bronze schema. So it
going to go and truncate first the
tables and then do a bulk insert. And
about the parameters, this source
procedure does not accept any parameter
or return any values. And here a quick
example how to execute it. All right. So
I think I'm happy with that. So let's go
and commit it. All right. My friends, so
with that we have committed our code
into the g. And with that we are done
building the bronze layer. So the whole
op is done. Now we're going to go to the
next one. This one going to be more
advanced than the bronze layer because
there will be a lot of struggle with
cleaning the data and so on. So we're
going to start with the first task where
we're going to analyze and explore the
data in the source systems. So let's
go. Okay. So now we're going to start
with the big question. How to build the
server layer? What is the process? Okay.
As usual, first things first, we have to
analyze. And now the task before
building anything in the server layer we
have to go and explore the data in order
to understand the content of our sources
once we have it what we're going to do
we will be starting coding and here the
transformation that we're going to do is
data cleansing this is usually process
that take really long time and I usually
do it in three steps the first step is
to check first the data quality issues
that we have in the bronze layer so
before writing any data transformations
first we have to understand what are the
issues and only then I start writing
think data transformations in order to
fix all those quality issues that we
have in the bronze and the last step
once I have clean results what we're
going to do we're going to go and insert
it into the server layer and those are
the three faces that we will be doing as
we are writing the code for the silver
layer and the third step once we have
all the data in the server layer we have
to make sure that the data is now
correct and we don't have any quality
issues anymore and if you find any
issues of course what you going to do
we're going to go back to coding we're
going to do the data cleansing and again
object. So it is like a cycle between
validating and coding. Once the quality
of the silver layer is good, we cannot
skip the last phase where we're going to
document and commit our work in the G.
And here we're going to have two new
documentations. We're going to build the
data flow diagram and as well the data
integration diagram after we understood
the relationship between the sources
from the first step. So this is the
process and this is how we're going to
build the server layer.
All right. So now exploring the data in
the bronze layer. So why it is very
important? Because understanding the
data it is the key to make smart
decisions in the server layer. It was
not the focus in the bronze layer to
understand the content of the data at
all. We focus only how to get the data
to the data warehouse. So that's why we
have now to take a moment in order to
explore and understand the tables and as
well how to connect them. what are the
relationship between these tables and it
is very important as you are learning
about the new source system is to create
like some kind of documentation. So now
let's go and explore the sources. Okay.
So now let's go and explore them one by
one. We can start with the first one
from the CRM. We have the customer info.
So right click on it and say select top
thousand rows. And this is of course
important if you have like a lot of
data. Don't go and explore millions of
rows. Always limit your query. So for
example here we are using the top
thousands just to make sure that you are
not impacting the system with your
queries. So now let's have a look to the
content of this table. So we can see
that we have here customer informations.
So we have an ID, we have a key for the
customer, we have first name, last name,
marital status, gender and the creation
date of the customer. So simply this is
a table for the customer information and
a lot of details for the customers. And
here we have like two identifiers. one
it is like technical ID and another one
it's like the customer number so maybe
we can use either the ID or the key in
order to join it with other tables so
now what I usually do is to go and draw
like data model or let's say integration
model just to document and visual what I
am understanding because if you don't do
that you're going to forget it after a
while so now we go and search for a
shape let's search for a table and I'm
going to go and pick this one over here
so here we can go and change the style
for example we can make it rounded or
you can go make it sketch and so on. And
we can go and change the color. I'm
going to make it blue. Then go to the
text. Make sure to select the whole
thing. And let's make it bigger. 26. And
then what I'm going to do for those
items, I'm just going to select them and
go to our range and maybe make it 40.
Something like this. So now what we're
going to do, we're going to just go and
put the table name. So this is the one
that we are now learning about. And what
I'm going to do, I'm just going to go
and put here the primary key. I will not
go and list all the informations. So the
primary key was the ID. And I will go
and remove all those stuff. I don't need
it. Now, as you can see, the table name
is not really friendly. So I can go and
bring a text and put it here on top and
say this is the customer information.
Just to make it friendly and to not
forget about it. And as well going to
increase the size to maybe 20 something
like this. Okay. With that, we have our
first table. and we're going to go and
keep exploring. So let's move to the
second one. We're going to take the
product information, right click on it
and select the top thousand rows. I will
just put it below the previous query.
Query it. Now by looking to this table
we can see we have product informations.
So we have here a primary key for the
product and then we have like key or
let's say product number and after that
we have the full name of the product the
product costs and then we have the
product line and then we have like start
and end. Well this is interesting to
understand why we have start and ends.
Let's have a look for example for those
three rows all of those three having the
same key but they have different ids. So
it is the same product but with
different costs. So for 2011 we have the
cost of 12. Then 2012 we have 14 and for
the last year 2013 we have 13. So it's
like we have like a history for the
changes. So this table not only holding
the current informations of the product
but also history informations of the
product and that's why we have those to
date start and end. Now let's go back
and draw this information over here. So
I'm just going to go and duplicate it.
So the name of this table going to be
the BRD info and let's go and give it
like a short description current and
history products information something
like this just to not forget that we
have history in this table and here we
have as well the PRD ID and there is
like nothing that we can use in order to
join those two tables we don't have like
a customer ID here or in the other table
we don't have any product ID okay so
that's it for this table let's jump to
the third table and the last one in the
CRM M. So let's go and select. I just
made the other queries as well short. So
let's go and execute. So what do we have
over here? We have a lot of informations
about the order, the sales and a lot of
measures. Order number. We have the
product key. So this is something that
we can use in order to join it with the
product table. We have the customer ID.
We don't have the customer key. So here
we have like ID and here we have key. So
there's like two different ways on how
to join tables. And then we have here
like dates. the order date, the shipping
date, the due date and then we have the
sales amount, the quantity and the
price. So this is like an event table.
It is transactional table about the
orders and sales and it is great table
in order to connect the customers with
the products and as well with the
orders. So let's document this new
information that we have. So the table
name is the sales details. So we can go
and describe it like this.
Transactional records about sales and
orders. And now we have to go and
describe how we can connect this table
to the other two. So we are not using
the product ID. We are using the
products key. And now we need a new
column over here. So you can hold
control and enter or you can go over
here and add a new row. And the other
row going to be the customer ID. So now
for the customer ID it is easy. we can
go and grab an arrow in order to connect
those two tables. But for the product
key, we are not using the ID. So that's
why I'm just going to go and remove this
one and say product key. Let's have
again a check. So this is a product key.
It's not the product ID. And if we go
and check the old table, the products
info, you can see we are using this key
and not the primary key. So what we're
going to do now, we will just go and
link it like this. And maybe switch
those two tables. So I will put the
customers below. Just perfect. It looks
nice. Okay. So, let's keep moving. Let's
go now to the other source system. We
have the ARP and the first one is ARB
cost and we have this cryptical name.
Let's go and select the data. So, now
here it's small table and we have only
three informations. So, we have here
something called CD and then we have
something I think this is the birthday
and the gender information. So, we have
here male, female and so on. So, it
looks again like the customer
informations but here we have like extra
data about the birthday. And now if you
go and compare it to the customer table
that we have from the other source
system. Let's go and query it. You can
see the new table from the ARB don't
have ids. It has actually the customer
number or the key. So we can go and join
those two tables using the customer key.
Let's go and document this information.
So I will just go and copy paste and put
it here on the right side. I will just
go and change the color now since we are
now talking about different source
system. And here the table name going to
be this one. and the key called C ID.
Now, in order to join this table with
the customer info, we cannot join it
with the customer ID. We need the
customer key. That's why here we have to
go and add a new row. So, ctrl enter and
we're going to say customer key. And
then we have to go and make a nice arrow
between those two keys. So, we're going
to go and give it a description,
customer information. And here we have
the birth date. Okay. So, now let's keep
going. We're going to go to the next
one. We have the ERP location. Let's go
and query this table. So, what do we
have over here? We have the CD again.
And as you can see, we have country
informations. And this is of course
again the customer number. And we have
only this information, the country. So,
let's go and document this information.
This is the customer location. Table
name going to be like this. And we still
have the same ID. So, we have here still
the customer ID and we can go and join
it using the customer key. And we have
to give it the description location of
customers and we can say here the
country. Okay. So now let's go to the
last table and explore it. We have the
ERP ex catalog. So let's go and query
those informations. So what do we have
here? We have like an ID, a category, a
subcategory and the maintenance. Here we
have like either yes and no. So by
looking to this table we have all the
categories and the subcategories of the
products and here we have like special
identifier for those informations. Now
the question is how to join it. So I
would like to join it actually with the
product informations. So let's go and
check those two tables together. Okay.
So in the product we don't have any ID
for the categories but we have these
informations actually in the product
key. So the first five characters of the
product key is actually the category ID.
So we can use this information over here
in order to join it with the categories.
So we can go and describe this
information like this and then we have
to go and give it a name. And then here
we have the ID and the ID could be
joined using the product key. So that
means for the product information we
don't need at all the product ID the
primary key. All what we need is the
product key or the product number. And
what I would like to do is like to group
those informations in a box. So, let's
go grab like any boxes here on the left
side and make it bigger and then make
the edges a little bit smaller. Let's
remove the fill and the line. I will
make a dotted line. And then let's grab
another box over here and say this is
the CRM. And we can go and increase the
size maybe something like 40 smaller 35
bold and change the color to blue and
just place it here on top of this box.
So with that we can understand all those
tables belongs to the source system CRM
and we can do the same stuff for the
right side as well. Now of course we
have to go and add the description here.
So it's going to be the products
categories. All right. So with that we
have now a clear understanding how the
tables are connected to each others. We
understand now the content of each table
and of course it can help us to clean up
the data in the silver layer in order to
prepare it. So as you can see it is very
important to take time understanding the
structure of the tables the relationship
between them before start writing any
code. All right. So with that we have
now clear understanding about the
sources and with that we have as well
created a data integration in the draw.
So with that we have more understanding
about how to connect the sources. And
now in the next two task we will go back
to SQL where we're going to start
checking the quality and as well doing a
lot of data transformations. So let's
go.
Okay, so now let's have a quick look to
the specifications of the server layer.
So the main objective to have clean and
standardized data. We have to prepare
the data before going to the gold layer.
And we will be building tables inside
the silver layer. And the way of loading
the data from the bronze to the silver
is a full load. So that means we're
going to truncate and then insert. And
here we're going to have a lot of data
transformations. So we're going to clean
the data. We're going to bring
normalizations, standardizations. We're
going to derive new columns. We will be
doing as well data enrichments. So a lot
of things to be done in the data
transformation. But we will not be
building any new data model. So those
are the specifications and we have to
commit ourself to this scope. Okay. So
now building the DDL script for the
silver layer going to be way easier than
the bronze because the definition and
the structure of each table in the
silver going to be identical to the
bronze layer. We are not doing anything
new. So all what you have to do is to
take the DDL script from the bronze
layer and just go and search and replace
for the schema. I'm just using the
Notepad++ for the scripts. So I'm going
to go over here and say replace the
bronze dots with silver dots and I'm
going to go and replace all. So with
that now all the DDL is targeting the
schema silver layer which is exactly
what we need. All right. Now before we
execute our new DDL script for the
silver, we have to talk about something
called the metadata columns. They are
additional columns or fields that the
data engineers add to each table that
don't come directly from the source
systems. But the data engineers use it
in order to provide extra informations
for each record. Like we can add a
column called create date is when the
record was loaded or an update date when
the record got updated or we can add the
source system in order to understand the
origin of the data that we have or
sometimes we can add the file location
in order to understand the lineage from
which file the data come from. Those are
great tool if you have data issue in
your data warehouse if there is like
corrupt data and so on. This can help
you to track exactly where this issue
happens and when. And as well it is
great in order to understand whether I
have gap in my data especially if you
are doing incremental loads. It is like
putting labels on everything and you
will thank yourself later when you start
using them in hard times as you have an
issue in your data warehouse. So now
back to our DDL scripts and all what you
have to do is to go and do the
following. So for example for the first
table I will go and add at the end one
more extra column. So it start with the
prefix TWW as we have defined in the
naming convention and then underscore
let's have the create date and the data
type going to be date time 2 and now
what we can do is we can go and add a
default value for it. I want the
database to generate these informations
automatically. We don't have to specify
that in any scripts. So which value?
It's going to be the get date. So each
record going to be inserted in this
table will get automatically a value
from the current date and time. So now
as you can see the naming convention it
is very important. All those columns
comes from the source system and only
this one column comes from the data
engineer of the data warehouse. Okay. So
that's it. Let's go and repeat the same
thing for all other tables. So I will
just go and add this piece of
information for each
DDL. All right. So I think that's it.
All what you have to do is now to go and
execute the whole DDL script for the
silver layer. Let's go and do that. All
right, perfect. There's no errors. Let's
go and refresh the tables on the object
explorer. And with that, as you can see,
we have six tables for the silver layer.
It is identical to the bronze layer, but
we have one extra column for the
metadata. All right. All right. So now
in the server layer before we start
writing any data transformations and
cleansing we have first to detect the
quality issues in the bronze without
knowing the issues we cannot find
solution right we will explore first the
quality issues only then we start
writing the transformation scripts. So
let's
go. Okay. Okay. So now what we're going
to do, we're going to go through all the
tables over the bronze layer, clean up
the data, and then insert it to the
server layer. So let's start with the
first table, the first bronze table from
the source CRM. So we're going to go to
the bronze CRM customer info. So let's
go and query the data over here. Now, of
course, before writing any data
transformations, we have to go and
detect and identify the quality issues
of this table. So usually I start with
the first check where we go and check
the primary key. So we have to go and
check whether there are nulls inside the
primary key and whether there are
duplicates. So now in order to detect
the duplicates in the primary key what
we have to do is to go and aggregate the
primary key. If we find any value in the
primary key that exist more than once
that means it is not unique and we have
duplicates in the table. So let's go and
write query for that. So what we're
going to do, we're going to go with the
customer ID and then we're going to go
and count and then we have to group up
the data. So group by based on the
primary key and of course we don't need
all the results. We need only where we
have an issue. So we're going to say
having
count higher than one. So we are
interested in the values where the count
is higher than one. So let's go and
execute it. Now as you can see we have
issue in this table. we have duplicates
because all those ids exist more than
one in the table which is completely
wrong. We should have the primary key
unique and you can see as well we have
three records where the primary key is
empty which is as well a bad thing. Now
there is an issue here. If we have only
one null it will not be here at the
result. So what I'm going to do I'm
going to go over here and say or the
primary key is null just in case if we
have only one null I'm still interested
to see the results. So if I go and run
it again, we'll get the same results. So
this is equality check that you can do
on the table. And as you can see, it is
not meeting the expectation. So that
means we have to do something about it.
So let's go and create a new query. So
here what we're going to do, we can
start writing the query that is doing
the data transformation and the data
cleansing. So let's start again by
selecting the
data and execute it again. So now what I
usually do I go and focus on the issue.
So for example let's go and take one of
those values and I focus on it before
start writing the transformation. So
we're going to say where customer ID
equal to this value. All right. So now
as you can see we have here the issue
where the ID exist three times but
actually we are interested only on one
of them. So the question is how to pick
one of those. Usually we search for a
time stamp or date value to help us. So
if you check the creation date over here
we can understand that this record this
one over here is the newest one and the
previous two are older than it. So that
means if I have to go and pick one of
those values I would like to get the
latest one because it holds the most
fresh information. So what we have to do
is we have to go and rank all those
values based on the create dates and
only pick the highest one. So that means
we need a racking function and for that
in scale we have the amazing window
functions. So let's go and do that. We
will use the function row number over
and then partition by and here we have
to divide the table by the customer ID.
So we're going to divide it by the
customer ID and in order now to rank
those rows we have to sort the data by
something. So order by and as we
discussed we want to sort the data by
the creation date. So create
date and we're going to sort it
descending. So the highest first then
the lowest. So let's go and do that. And
now we're going to go and give it a name
flag last. So now let's go and execute
it. Now the data is sorted by the
creation date. And you can see over here
that this record is the number one. Then
the one that is older is two and the
oldest one is three. Of course we are
interested in the rank number one. Now
let's go and remove the filter and check
everything. So now if you have a look to
the table you can see that on the flag
we have everywhere like one and that's
because the those primary keys exist
only one but sometimes we will not have
one we'll have two three and so on. If
there's like duplicates we can go of
course and do a double check. So let's
go over here and say select
star from this query we can say where
flag last is in equal to one. So let's
go and query it. And now we can see all
the data that we don't need because they
are causing duplicates in the primary
key and they have like an old status. So
what we're going to do we're going to
say equal to one. And with that we
guarantee that our primary key is unique
and each value exist only once. So if I
go and query it like this you will see
we will not find any duplicate inside
our table. And we can go and check that
of course. So let's go and check this
primary key. And we're going to say and
customer ID equal to this value. And you
can see it exists now only once and we
are getting the freshest data from this
primary key. So with that we have
defined like transformation in order to
remove any duplicates. Okay. So now
moving on to the next one. As you can
see in our table we have a lot of values
where they are like string values. Now
for these string values we have to check
the unwanted spaces. So now let's go and
write a query that's going to detect
those unwanted spaces. So we're going to
say select this column the first name
from our table bronze customer
information. So let's go and query it.
Now by just looking to the data it's
going to be really hard to find those
unwanted spaces especially if they are
at the end of the word. But there is a
very easy way in order to detect those
issues. So what we're going to do we're
going to do a filter. So now we're going
to say the first name is not equal to
the first name after trimming the
values. So if you use the function trim,
what it going to do? It's going to go
and remove all the leading and trailing
spaces. So the first name. So if this
value is not equal to the first name
after trimming it, then we have an
issue. So it is very simple. Let's go
and execute it. So now in the result, we
will get a list of all first names where
we have spaces either at the start or at
the end. So again the expectation here
is no results. And the same thing we can
go and check something else like for
example the last name. So let's go and
do that over here and here. Let's go and
execute it. We see in the results we
have as well 17 customers where they
have like space in their last name which
is not really good. And we can go and
keep checking all the string values that
we have inside the table. So for example
the gender. So let's go and check
that and execute. Now as you can see we
don't have any results. That means the
quality of the gender is better and we
don't have any unwanted spaces. So now
we have to go and write transformation
in order to clean up those two columns.
Now what I'm going to do, I'm just going
to go and list all the columns in the
query instead of the star. All right. So
now I have a list of all the columns
that I need. And now what we have to do
is to go to those two columns and start
removing the unwanted spaces. So we will
just use the trim. It's very
simple. And give it a name, of course,
the same name. And we will trim as well
the last name. So let's go and query
this. And with that we have cleaned up
those two columns from any unwanted
spaces. Okay. So now moving on we have
those two informations. We have the
maritalial status and as well the
gender. If you check the values inside
those two columns as you can see we have
here low cardality. So we have limited
numbers of possible values that is used
inside those two columns. So what we
usually do is to go and check the data
consistency inside those two columns. So
it's very simple what we're going to do.
We're going to do the following. We're
going to say
distinct and we're going to check the
values. Let's go and do that. And now as
you can see we have only three possible
values either null, f or m which is
okay. We can stay like this of course.
But we can make a rule in our project
where we can say we will not be working
with data abbreviations. We will go and
use only friendly full names. So instead
of having an F, we're going to have like
a full word female. And instead of m
we're going to have like male and we
make it as a rule for the whole project.
So each time we find the gender
informations we try to give the full
name of it. So let's go and map those
two values to a friendly one. So we're
going to go to the gender over here and
say case when and we're going to say the
gender is equal to f then make it a
female. And when it
is equal to
m then map it to male. And now we have
to make decision about the nulls. As you
can see over here we have nulls. So do
we want to leave it as a null or we want
to use always the value unknown. So with
that we are replacing the missing values
with a standard default value or you can
leave it as null. But let's say in our
project that we are replacing all the
missing value with a default value. So
let's go and do that. We're going to say
else I'm going to go with the NA not
available or you can go with the unknown
of course. So that's for the gender
information like this. And we can go and
remove the old one. And now there is one
thing that I usually do in this case
where sometimes what happens currently
we are getting the capital F and the
capital M but maybe in the time
something change and you will get like
lower M and lower F. So just to make
sure in those cases we still are able to
map those values to the correct value.
What we're going to do we're going to
just use the function upper just to make
sure that if you get any lowerase values
we are able to catch it. So the same
thing over here as well. And now one
more thing that you can add as well. Of
course, if you are not trusting the data
because we saw some unwanted spaces in
the first name and the last name, you
might not trust that in the future. You
will get here as well unwanted spaces.
You can go and make sure to trim
everything just to make sure that you
are catching all those cases. So that's
it for now. Let's go and execute. Now,
as you can see, we don't have an M and
an F. We have a full word, male and
female. And if we don't have a value, we
don't have a null, we are getting here
not available. Now we can go and do the
same stuff for the maritial status. You
can see as well we have only three
possibilities. The s null and an M. We
can go and do the same stuff. So I will
just go and copy everything from here.
And I will go and use the marital status
and just remove this one from here. And
now what are the possible values? We
have the S. So it's going to be single.
We have an M for married. And we have as
well a null and with that we are getting
the not available. So with that we are
making as well data standardizations for
this column. So let's go and execute it.
Now as you can see we don't have those
short values. We have a full friendly
value for the status and as well for the
gender. And at the same time we are
handling the nulls inside those two
columns. So with that we are done with
those two columns. And now we can go to
the last one that create date. For this
type of informations, we make sure that
this column is a real date and not as a
string or varchar. And as we defined it
in the data type, it is a date which is
completely correct. So nothing to do
with this column. And now the next step
is that we're going to go and write the
insert statement. So how we going to do
it? We're going to go to the start over
here and say insert into
silverm customer info. Now we have to go
and specify all the columns that should
be inserted. So we're going to go and
type it. So something like this. And
then we have the query over here. Let's
go and execute it. So let's do that. So
with that we have inserted clean data
inside the silver table. So now what
we're going to do we're going to go and
take all the queries that we have used
in order to check the quality of the
bronze and let's go and take it to
another query and instead of having
bronze we're going to say silver. So
this is about the primary key. Let's go
and execute it. Perfect. We don't have
any results. So we don't have any
duplicates. The same thing for the next
one. So the silver and it was for the
first name. So let's go and check the
first name and run it. As you can see
there is no results. It is perfect. We
don't have any issues. You can of course
go and check the last
name and run it again. We don't have any
results over here. And now we can go and
check those low cardality columns like
for
example the gender. Let's go and execute
it. So as you can see we have the not
available or the unknown male and
female. So perfect and you can go and
have a final look to the table to the
silver customer info. Let's go and check
that. So now we can have a look to all
those columns. As you can see everything
looks perfect and you can see it is
working this metadata information that
we have added to the table definition.
Now it says when we have inserted all
those records to the table which is
really amazing information to have a
track and audit. Okay. So now by looking
to this script we have done different
types of data transformations. The first
one is with the first name and the last
name. Here we have done trimming
removing unwanted spaces. This is one of
the types of data cleansing. So we
remove unnecessary spaces or unwanted
characters to ensure data consistency.
Now moving on to the next
transformation. we have this case when
so what we have done here is data
normalization or we call it sometimes
data standardization so this
transformation is type of data cleansing
where we're going to map coded values to
meaningful user friendly description and
we have done the same transformation as
well to the gender another type of
transformation that we have done as well
in the same case when is that we have
handled the missing values so instead of
nulls we going to have not available so
handling missing data is as type of data
cleansing where we are filling the
blanks by adding for example a default
value. So instead of having an empty
string or a null we're going to have a
default value like the not available or
unknown. Another type of data and
transformations that we have done in
this script is we have removed the
duplicates. So removing duplicates is as
well type of data cleansing where we
ensure only one record for each primary
key by identifying and retaining only
the most relevant row to ensure there is
no duplicates inside our data and as we
are removing the duplicates of course we
are doing data filtering. So those are
the different types of data
transformations that we have done in
this script.
All right, moving on to the second table
in the bronze layer from the CRM. We
have the product info. And of course, as
usual, before we start writing any
transformations, we have to search for
data quality issues. And we start with
the first one, we have to check the
primary key. So we have to check whether
we have duplicates or nulls inside this
key. So what we have to do, we have to
group up the data by the primary key or
check whether we have nulls. So let's go
and execute it. So as you can see,
everything is safe. We don't have
duplicates or nulls in the primary key.
Now moving on to the next one, we have
the product key. Here we have in this
column a lot of informations. So now
what we have to do is to go and split
this string into two informations. So we
are deriving new two columns. So now
let's start with the first one is the
category ID. The first five characters
they are actually the category ID and we
can go and use the substring function in
order to extract part of a string. It
needs three arguments. The first one
going to be the column that we want to
extract from. And then we have to define
the position where to extract. And since
the first part is on the left side, we
going to start from the first position.
And then we have to specify the length.
So how many characters we want to
extract, we need five characters. So 1 2
3 4 5. So that's it for the category ID.
Category ID. Let's go and execute it.
Now, as you can see, we have a new
column called the category ID. and it
contains the first part of the string
and in our database from the other
source system we have as well the
category ID. Now we can go and double
check just in order to make sure that we
can join data together. So we're going
to go and check the ID from the bronze
table ERP and this canopy from the
category. So in this table we have the
category ids and you can see over here
those are the ids of the category and in
the code layer we have to go and join
those two tables. But here we still have
an issue. We have here an underscore
between the category and the
subcategory. But in our table we have
actually a minus. So we have to replace
that with an underscore in order to have
matching informations between those two
tables. Otherwise we will not be able to
join the tables. So we're going to use
the function
replace. And what we are replacing? We
are replacing the minus with an
underscore something like this. And if
you go now and execute it, we will get
an underscore exactly like the other
table. And of course we can go and check
whether everything is matching by having
very simple query where we say this new
information not in. And then we have
this nice subquery. So we are trying to
find any category ID that is not
available in the second table. So let's
go and execute it. Now as you can see we
have only one category that is not
matching. We are not finding it in this
table which is maybe correct. So if you
go over here you will not find this
category. I just make it a little bit
bigger. So we are not finding this one
category from this table which is fine.
So our check is okay. Okay. So that we
have the first part. Now we have to go
and extract the second part and we're
going to do the same thing. So we're
going to use the substring and the three
argument the product key but this time
we will not start cutting from the first
position we have to be in the middle. So
1 2 3 4 5 6 7. So we start from the
position number seven. And now we have
to define the length how many characters
to be extracted. But if you look over
here you can see that we have different
length of the product keys. It is not
fixed like the category ID. So we cannot
go and here specify number. We have to
make something dynamic and there is
trick in order to do that. We're going
to go and use the length of the whole
column. With that we make sure that we
are always getting enough characters to
be extracted and we will not be losing
any informations. So we will make it
dynamic like this. We will not have it
as a fixed length and with that we have
the product key. So let's go and execute
it. As you can see we are now extracting
the second part from this string. Now
why we need the product key? We need it
in order to join it with another table
called sales details. So let's go and
check the sales details. So let me just
check the column name. It is SLS product
key. So from bronze
CRM sales. Let's go and check the data
over here. And it looks wonderful. So
actually we can go and join those
informations together. But of course
we're going to go and check that. So
we're going to say where and we're going
to take our new column and we're going
to say not in the sub query just to make
sure that we are not missing anything.
So let's go and execute. So it looks
like we have a lot of products that
don't have any orders. Well, I don't
have a nice feelings about it. Let's go
and try something like this one here.
And we say where sld key like this value
over here. So I'll just cut the last
three just to search inside this table.
So we really don't have such a keys. Let
me just cut the second one. So let's go
and search for it. We don't have it as
well. So anything that starts with the F
key, we don't have any order with the
product where it starts with the F key.
So let's go and remove it. But still we
are able to join the tables, right? So
if I go and say in instead of not in. So
with that you are able to match all
those products. So that means everything
is fine. Actually it's just products
that don't have any orders. So with that
I'm happy with this transformation. Now
moving on to the next one. We have here
the name of the product. We can go and
check whether there is unwanted spaces.
So let's go to our quality checks. Make
sure to use the same table and we're
going to use the product name and check
whether we find any unmatching after
trimming. So let's go and do it. Well,
it looks really fine. So we don't have
to trim anything. This column is safe.
Now moving on to the next one. We have
the costs. So here we have numbers and
we have to check the quality of the
numbers. So what we can do? We can check
whether we have nulls or negative
numbers. So negative costs or negative
prices which is not realistic depend on
the business of course. So let's say in
our business we don't have any negative
costs. So it's going to be like this.
Let's go and check whether it's
something less than zero or whether we
have costs that is null. So let's go and
check those informations. Well, as you
can see, we don't have any negative
values, but we have nulls. So we can go
and handle that by replacing the null
with a zero. Of course, if the business
allow that. So in SQL server, in order
to replace the null with a zero, we have
a very nice function called is null. So
we are saying if it is null then replace
this value with a zero. It is very
simple like this and we give it a name
of course. So let's go and execute it.
And as you can see we don't have any
more nulls. We have zero which is better
for the calculations if you are later
doing any aggregate functions like the
average. Now moving on to the next one
we have the product line. This is again
abbreviation of something and the
cardinality is low. So let's go and
check all possible values inside this
column. So we're just going to use the
distinct going to be BRD line. So let's
go and execute it. And as you can see
the possible values are null M R ST. And
again those are abbreviations but in our
data warehouse we have decided to give
full nice names. So we have to go and
replace those codes those abbreviations
with a friendly value. And of course in
order to get those informations I
usually go and ask the expert from the
source system or an expert from the
process. So let's start building our
case win. And then let's use the upper
and as well the trim just to make sure
that we are having all the cases. So the
BRD
line is equal to so let's start with the
first value the M. Then we will get the
friendly value it's going to be
mountain. then to the next one. So I
will just copy and paste here. If it is
an R then it is road and another one for
let me check what do we have here? We
have M R and then S. The S stands for
other sales and we have the T. So let's
go and get the T. So the T stands for
touring. We have at the end an else for
unknown not available. So we don't need
any nulls. So that's it. And we're going
to name it as before. So product line.
So let's remove the old one. And let's
execute it. And as you can see, we don't
have here anymore those shortcuts and
the abbreviations. We have now full
friendly value. But I will go and have
here like capital O. It looks nicer. So
that we have nice friendly value. Now by
looking to this case when as you can see
it is always like we are mapping one
value to another value and we are
repeating all time upper time upper time
and so on. We have here a quick form in
the case when if it is just a simple
mapping. So the syntax is very simple we
say case and then we have the column. So
we are evaluating this value over here
and then we just say when without the
equal so if it is an M then make it
mountain. the same thing for the next
one and so so with that we have the
functions only once and we don't have to
go and keep repeating the same function
over and over and this one only if you
are mapping values but if you have
complex conditions you cannot do it like
this but for now I'm going to stay with
the quick form of the case when it looks
nicer and shorter so let's go and
execute it we will get the same results
okay so now back to our table let's go
to the last two columns we have the
start and end date so it's like defining
an interval we have start and end so
Let's go and check the quality of the
start and end dates. We're going to go
and say select star from our bronze
table. And now we're going to go and
search it like this. We are searching
for the end date that is smaller than
the start. So we are key to start dates.
So let's go and query this. So you can
see the start is always like after the
end which makes no sense at all. So we
have here data issue with those two
dates. So now for this kind of data
transformations what I usually do is I
go and grab few examples and put it in
Excel and try to think about how I'm
going to go and fix it. So here I took
like two products this one and this one
over here. And for that we have like
three rows for each one of them. And we
have this situation over here. So the
question now how we going to go and fix
it? I will go and make like a copy of
one solution where we're going to say
it's very simple. Let's go and switch
the start date with the end date. So if
I go and grab the end date and put it at
the start, things going to look way
nicer, right? So we have the start is
always younger than the end. But my
friends, the data now makes no sense
because we say it start from 2007 and
ends by 2011 the price was 12. But
between 2008 and 2012, we have 14. which
is not really good because if you take
for example the year 2010 for 2010 it
was 12 and at the same time 14. So it is
really bad to have an overlapping
between those two dates. It should start
from 2007 and end with 11 and then start
Feb from 12 and end with something else.
There should be no overlapping between
years. So it's not enough to say the
start should be always smaller than the
ends but as well the end of the first
history should be younger than the start
of the next records. This is as well a
rule in order to have no overlapping.
This one has no start but has already an
end which is not really okay because we
have always to have a start. Each new
record in historiizations has to has a
start. So for this record over here this
is as well wrong. And of course it is
okay to have the start without an end.
So in this scenario it's fine because
this indicate this is the current
informations about the costs. So again
this solution is not working at all. So
now for the solution two what we can say
let's go and ignore completely the end
date and we take only the start date. So
let's go and paste it over here. But now
we go and rebuild the end date
completely from the start date following
the rules that we have defined. So the
rule says the end of date of the current
records comes from the start date from
the next records. So here this end date
comes from this value over here from the
next record. So that means we take the
next start date and put it at the end
date for the previous records. So with
that as you can see it is working the
end date is higher than the start date.
And as well we are making sure this date
is not overlapping with the next record.
But as well in order to make it way
nicer we can subtract it with one. So we
can take the previous day like this. So
with that we are making sure the end
date is smaller than the next start. And
now for the next record this one over
here the end date going to come from the
next start date. So we will take this
one for here and put it as an end date
and subtract it with one. So we will get
the previous day. So now if you compare
those two you can see it's still higher
than the start. And if you compare it
with the next record this one over here
it is still smaller than the next one.
So there is no overlapping. And now for
the last record since we don't have here
any informations it will be a null which
is totally fine. So as you can see I'm
really happy with this scenario over
here. Of course you can go and validate
this with an expert from the source
system. But let's say I have done that
and they approved it and now I can go
and clean up the data using this new
logic. So this is how I usually
brainstorm about fixing an issues. If I
have like a complex stuff, I go and use
Excel and then discuss it with the
expert using this example. It's way
better than showing a database queries
and so on. It just makes things easier
to explain and as well to discuss. So
now how I usually do it, I usually go
and make a focus on only the columns
that I need and take only one two
scenarios while I'm building the logic
and once everything is ready I go and
integrate it in the query. So now I'm
focusing only on these columns and only
for these products. So now let's go and
build our logic. Now in SQL if you are
at specific record and you want to
access another information from another
records and for that we have two amazing
window functions. We have the lead and
log. In this scenario, we want to access
the next records. That's why we have to
go with the function leads. So, let's go
and build it lead. And then what do we
need? We need the lead of the
start date. So, we want the start date
of the next record. And then we say over
and we have to partition the data. So,
the window going to be focusing on only
one product which is the product key and
not the product ID. So, we are dividing
the data by product key. And of course,
we have to go and sort the data. So
order by and we are sorting the data by
the start
date and ascending. So from the lowest
to the highest and let's go and give it
another name. So as let's say test for
example just to test the data. So let's
go and execute. And I think I missed
something here. It is partition by. So
let's go and execute again. And now
let's go and check the results for the
first partition over here. So the start
is 2011 and the end is 2012. And this
information came from the next record.
So this data is moved to the previous
record over here. And the same thing for
this record. So the end date comes from
the next record. So our logic is
working. And the last record over here
is null because we are at the end of the
window and there is no next data. That's
why we will get null and this is perfect
of course. So it looks really awesome.
But what is missing is we have to go and
get the previous day. And we can do that
very simply using minus one. we are just
subtracting one day. So we have no
overlapping between those two dates and
the same thing for those two dates. So
as you can see we have just built a
perfect end date which is way better
than the original data that we got from
the source system. Now let's take this
one over here and put it inside our
query. So we don't need the end date, we
need our new end date. Let's just remove
that test and execute. Now it looks
perfect. All right. Now we are not done
yet with those two dates. Actually we
are saying all time dates because we
don't have here any informations about
the time always zero. So it makes no
sense to have these informations inside
our data. So what we can do we can do a
very simple cast and we make this column
as a date instead of date time. So this
is for the first one and as well for the
next one as date. So let's try that out.
And as you can see it is nicer. We don't
have the time informations. Of course,
we can tell the source systems about all
those issues. But since they don't
provide a time, it makes no sense to
have date and time. Okay, so it was a
long run, but we have now a cleaned
product informations. And this is way
nicer than the original product
information that we got from the source
CRM. So if you grab the DDL of the
server table, you can see that we don't
have a category ID. So we have product
ID and product key. And as well those
two columns, we just changed the data
type. So it's date time here but we have
changed that to a date. So that means we
have to go and do few modifications to
the DDL. So what we're going to do we're
going to go over here and say category
ID and I will be using the same data
type for the start and the end. This
time going to be date and not date and
time. So that's it for now. Let's go and
execute it in order to repair the DDL.
And this is what happen in the silver
layer. Sometimes we have to adjust the
metadata if the quality of the data
types and so on is not good or we are
building new derived informations in
order later to integrate the data. So it
will be like very close to the bronze
layer but with few modifications. So
make sure to update your DTL scripts.
And now the next step is that we're
going to go and insert the data into the
table. And now the next we're going to
go and insert the result of this query
that is cleaning up the bronze table
into the silver table. So as we done it
before insert into silver the product
info and then we have to go and list all
the columns. I've just prepared those
columns. So with that we can go and now
run our query in order to insert the
data. So now as you can see this did
insert the data and the very important
step is now to check the quality of the
silver table. So we go back to our data
quality checks and we go switch to the
silver. So let's check the primary key.
There is no issues and we can go and
check for example here the trims there
is as well no issue and now let's go and
check the costs it should not be
negative or null which is perfect let's
go and check the data standardizations
as you can see they are friendly and we
don't have any nulls and now very
interesting the order of the dates so
let's go and check that as you can see
we don't have any issues and finally
what I do I go and have a final look to
the silver table and As we can see
everything is inserted correctly in the
correct columns. So all those columns
comes from the source system and the
last one is automatically generated from
the DDL indicate when we loaded this
table. Now let's sit back and have a
look to our script. What are the
different types of data transformations
that we have done here is for example
over here the category ID and the
product key we have derived new columns.
So it is when we create a new column
based on calculations or transformations
of an existing one. So sometimes we need
columns only for analytics and we cannot
each time go to the source system and
ask them to create it. So instead of
that we derive our own columns that we
need for the analytics. Another
transformation we have is the is null
over here. So we are handling here
missing information. Instead of null
we're going to have a zero. And one more
transformation we have over here for the
product line. We have done here data
normalization. Instead of having a code
value we have a friendly value. And as
well we have handled the missing data.
For example, over here instead of having
a null, we're going to have not
available. All right, moving on to
another data transformation. We have
done data type casting. So we are
converting the data type from one to
another. And this considered as well to
be a data transformation. And now moving
on to the last one. We are doing as well
data type casting. But what's more
important, we are doing data enrichment.
This type of transformation, it's all
about adding a value to your data. So we
are adding new relevant data to our data
sets. So those are the different types
of data transformations that we have
done for this
table. Okay. So let's keep going. We
have the sales details and this is the
last table in the CRM. So what do we
have over here? We have the order number
and this is a string. Of course we can
go and check whether we have an issue
with the unwanted spaces. So we can
search whether we're going to find
something. So we can say trim and
something like this. and let's go and
execute it. So we can see that we don't
have any unwanted spaces. That means we
don't have to transform this column. So
we can leave it as it is. Now the next
two columns they are like keys and ids
in order to connect it with the other
tables. As we learned before we are
using the product key in order to
connect it with the product informations
and we are connecting the customer ID
with the customer ID from the customer
info. So that means we have to go and
check whether everything is working
perfectly. So we can go and check the
integrity of those columns where we say
the product key not in and then we make
a subquery and this time we can work
with the silver layer right so we can
say the product key from silver dot
product info so let's go and query this
and as you can see we are not getting
any issue that means all the product
keys from the sales details can be used
and connected with the product info the
same thing we can go and check the
integrity of the customer ID and we can
use not the product we and go to the
customer info and the name was CST ID.
So let's go and query that and the same
thing we don't have here any issues. So
that means we can go and connect the
sales with the customers using the
customer ID and we don't have to do any
transformations for it. So things looks
really nice for those three columns. Now
we come to the challenging one. We have
here the dates. Now those dates are not
actual dates. They are integer. So those
are numbers and we don't want to have it
like this. We would like to clean that
up. we have to change the data type from
integer to a dates. Now if you want to
convert an integer to a date, we have to
be careful with the values that we have
inside each of those columns. So now
let's check the quality for example of
the order dates. Let's say where order
dates is less than zero for example
something negative. Well, we don't have
any negative values which is good. Let's
go and check whether we have any zeros.
Well, this is bad. So we have here a lot
of zeros. Now what we can do? We can
replace those informations with a null.
We can use of course the null if
function like this. We can say null if
and if it is zero then make it null. So
let's execute it. And as you can see now
all those informations are null. Now
let's go and check again the data. So
now this integer has the year's
information at the start then the months
and then the day. So here we have to
have like 1 2 3 4 5. So the length of
each number should be h. And if the
length is less than eight or higher than
eight then we have an issue. Let's go
and check that. So we're going to say or
length sales order is not equal to h
that means less or higher. Let's go and
execute it. Now let's go and check the
results over here. And those two
informations they don't look like a
date. So we cannot go and make from
these informations a real date. They are
just bad data quality. And of course you
can go and check the boundaries of a
date. Like for example it should not be
higher than for example let's go and get
this value 2050 and then any for the
month and the date. So let's go and
execute it. And if we just remove those
informations just to make sure. So we
don't have any date that is outside of
the boundaries that you have in your
business. Or you go for example and say
the boundary should be not less than
depend when your business started. Maybe
something like this. We are getting of
course those values because they are
less than null. But if you have values
around this dates you will get it as
well in the query. So we can go and add
the rests. So all those checks like
validate the column that has a date
informations and it has the data type
integer. So again what are the issues
over here? We have zeros and sometimes
we have like strange numbers that cannot
be converted to a dates. So let's go and
fix that in our query. So we can say
case when the sales order the order
dates is equal to zero or of the order
date is not equal to 8 then null. Right?
We don't want to deal with those values.
they are just wrong and they they are
not real dates otherwise we say else
it's going to be the order date. Now
what we're going to do we're going to go
and convert this to a date. We don't
want this as an integer. So how we can
do that? We can go and cast it first to
a varchar because we cannot cast from
integer to date in SQL server. First you
have to convert it to a varchchar and
then from varchchar you go to a date.
Well this is how we do it in SQL server.
So we cast it first to a varchar and
then we cast it to a date like this.
That's it. So we have end and we are
using the same column
name. So this is how we transform an
integer to a date. So let's go and query
this. And as you can see the order date
now is a real date. It is not a number.
So we can go and get rid of the old
column. Now we have to go and do the
same stuff for the shipping dates. So,
we can go over here and replace
everything with the shipping date and
let's go and query. Well, as you can
see, the shipping date is perfect. We
don't have any issue with this column.
But still, I don't like that we found a
lot of issues with the order date. So,
what we're going to do just in case this
happens for the shipping date in the
future, I will go and apply the same
rules to the shipping dates. Oh, let's
take the shipping
date like this. And if you don't want to
apply it now, you have always to build
like quality checks that runs every day
in order to detect those issues. And
once you detect it, then you can go and
do the transformations. But for now, I'm
going to apply it right away. So that is
for the shipping date. Now we go to the
due date and we will do the same test.
Let's go and execute it. And as well, it
is perfect. So still, I'm going to apply
the same rules. So let's get the due
date everywhere here in the query. Just
make sure you don't miss anything here.
So let's go and execute now. Perfect. As
you can see, we have the order date,
shipping date, and due date. And all of
them are date and don't have any wrong
data inside those columns. Now, still
there is one more check that we can do
and it's that the order date should be
always smaller than the shipping date or
the due date because it makes no sense,
right? If you are delivering an item
without an order. So first the order
should happen then we are shipping the
items. So there is like an order of
those dates and we can go and check
that. So we are checking now for invalid
date orders where we can say the order
date is higher than the shipping date or
we are searching as well for an order
where the order date is higher than the
due date. So we can have it like this
due date. So let's go and check. Well,
that's really good. We don't have such a
mistake on the data and the quality
looks good. So the order date is always
smaller than the shipping date or the
due date. So we don't have to do any
transformations or cleanup. Okay
friends, now moving on to the last three
columns. We have the sales, quantity and
the price. All those informations are
connected to each others. So we have a
business rule or calculation. It says
the sales must be equal to quantity
multiplied by the price. And all sales
quantity and price informations must be
positive numbers. So it's not allowed to
be negative, zero or null. So those are
the business rules and we have to check
the data consistency in our table. Does
all those three informations following
our rules? So we're going to start first
with our rule, right? So we're going to
say if the sales is not equal to
quantity multiplied by the price. So we
are searching where the result is not
matching our expectation. And as well we
can go and check other stuff like the
nulls. So for example we can say or
sales is null or quantity is
null and the last one for the price and
as well we can go and check whether they
are negative numbers or zero. So we can
go over here and say less or equal to
zero and apply it for the other columns
as well. So with that we are checking
the calculation and as well we are
checking whether we have null, zero or
negative numbers. Let's go and check our
informations. I'm going to have here
extinct. So let's go and query it. And
of course we have here bad data. But we
can go and sort the data by the sales
quantity and the price. So let's do it.
Now by looking to the data we can see in
the sales we have nulls. We have
negative numbers and zeros. So we have
all bad combinations and as well we have
here bad calculations. So as you can see
the price here is 50, the quantity is
one but the sales is two which is not
correct. And here we have as well wrong
calculations. Here we have to have a 10
and here nine or maybe the price is
wrong. And by looking to the quantity
now you can see we don't have any nulls.
We don't have any zeros or negative
numbers. So the quantity looks better
than the sales. And if you look to the
prices we have nulls we have negatives
and yeah we don't have zeros. So that
means the quality of the sales and the
price is wrong. The calculation is not
working and we have these scenarios. Now
of course how I do it here I don't go
and try now to transform everything on
my own. I usually go and talk to an
expert maybe someone from the business
or from the source system and I show
those scenarios and discuss and usually
there is like two answers either they
going to tell me you know what I will
fix it in my source so I have to live
with it there is incoming bad data and
the bad data going to be presented in
the warehouse until the source system
clean up those issues. And the other
answer you might get you know what we
don't have the budget and those data are
really old and we are not going to do
anything. So here you have to decide
either you leave it as it is or you say
you know what let's go and improve the
quality of the data. But here you have
to ask for the experts to support you
solving these issues because it really
depend on the rules. Different rules
makes different transformations. So now
let's say that we have the following
rules. If the sales informations are
null or negative or zero, then use the
calculation the formula by multiplying
the quality with the price. And now if
the prices are wrong, for example, we
have here a null or zero, then go and
calculate it from the sales and the
quantity. And if you have a price that
is a minus like minus 21, a negative
number, then you have to go and convert
it to a 21. So from a negative to a
positive without any calculations. So
those are the rules and now we're going
to go and build the transformations.
based on those rules. So let's do it
step by step. I will go over here and
we're going to start building the new
sales. So what is the rule says case
when of course as usual if the
sales is null or let's say the sales is
negative number or equal to zero or
another scenario we have a sales
information but it is not following the
calculation. So we have wrong
information in the sales. So we're going
to say the sales is not equal to the
quantity multiplied by the price. But of
course we will not leave the price like
this by using the function APS. The
absolute is going to go and convert
everything from negative to a positive.
Then what we have to do is to go and use
the calculation. So it going to be the
quantity multiplied by the price. So
that means we are not using the value
that's come from the source system. We
are recalculating it. Now let's say the
sales is correct and not one of those
scenarios. So we're going to say else.
We will go with the sales as it is that
comes from the source because it is
correct. It's really nice. Let's go and
say an end and give it the same name. I
will go and rename the old one here as
an old value and the same for the price.
The quantity will not touch it because
it is correct. So like this. And now
let's go and transform the prices. So
again as usual we go with case when. So
what are the scenarios? The price is
null or the price is less or equal to
zero. Then what we going to do? We're
going to do the calculation. So it's
going to be the sales divided by the
quantity the SLS quantity. But here we
have to make sure that we are not
dividing by zero. Currently we don't
have any zeros in the quantity but you
don't know in the future you might get a
zero and the whole code going to break.
So what you have to do is to go and say
if you get any zero replace it with a
null. So null if if it is zero then make
it null. So that's it. Now if the price
is not null and the price is not
negative or equal to zero then
everything is fine and that's why we're
going to have now the else it going to
be the price as it is from the source
system. So that's it. We're going to say
end as price. So I'm totally happy with
that. Let's go and execute it and check
of course. So those are the old
informations and those are the new
transformed cleaned up informations. So
here previously we have a null but now
we have two. So two multiplied with one
we are getting two. So the sales is here
correct. Now moving on to the next one
we have in the sales 40 but the price is
two. So two multiplied with one we
should get two. So the new sales is
correct. It is two and not 40. Now to
the next one over here the old sales is
zero. But if you go and multiply the
four with the quantity you will get
four. So the sales here is not correct.
That's why in the new sales we have it
correct as a four. And let's go and get
a minus. So in this case we have a minus
which is not correct. So we are getting
the price multiplied with one. We should
get here a nine. And this sales here is
correct. Now let's go and get a scenario
where the price is null like this here.
So we don't have here a price but we
calculated from the sales and the
quantity. So we divided the 10 by two
and we have five. So the new price is
better. And the same thing for the
minuses. So we have here minus 21 and in
the output we have 21 which is correct.
So for now I don't see any scenario
where the data is wrong. So everything
looks better than before. And with that
we have applied the business rules from
the experts and we have cleaned up the
data in the data warehouse. And this is
way better than before because we are
presenting now better data for analyszis
and reporting but it is challenging and
you have exactly to understand the
business. So now what we're going to do
we're going to go and copy those
informations and integrate it in our
query. So instead of sales we're going
to get our new calculation and instead
of the price we will get our correct
calculation and here I'm missing the
end. Let's go and run the whole thing
again. So with that we have as well now
cleaned sales quantity and price and it
is following our business rules. So with
that we are done cleaning up the sales
details. The next step we're going to go
and insert it to the sales details. But
we have to go and check again the DDL.
So now all what you have to do is to
compare those results with the DDL. So
the first one is the order number. It's
fine. The product key, the customer ID,
but here we have an issue. All those
informations now are date and not an
integer. So we have to go and change the
data type. And with that we have better
data type than before. Then the sales
quantity price it is correct. Let's go
and drop the table and create it from
scratch again. And don't forget to
update your DDL script. So that's it for
this. And we're going to go now and
insert the results into our silver table
sales details. And we have to go and
list now all the columns. I have already
prepared the list of all the columns. So
make sure that you have the correct
order of the columns. So let's go now
and insert the data. And with that and
with that we can see that the SQL did
insert data to our sales details. But
now very important is to check the
health of the silver table. So what
we're going to do instead here of
bronze, we're going to go and switch it
to silver. So let's check over here. So
here always the order is smaller than
the shipping and the due date, which is
really nice. But now I'm very interested
on the calculations. So here we're going
to switch it from bronze to silver. And
I'm going to go and get rid of all those
calculations because we don't need it
this. And now let's see whether we have
any issue. Well, perfect. Our data is
following the business rules. We don't
have any nulls, negative values, zeros.
Now as usual the last step the final
check we will just have a final look to
the table. So we have the order number
the product key the customer ID those
three dates we have the sales quantity
and the price and of course we have our
metadata column. Everything is perfect.
So now by looking to our code what are
the different types of data
transformation that we are doing. So in
those three columns we are doing the
following. So at the start we are
handling invalid data and this is as
well type of transformation and as well
at the same time we are doing data type
casting. So we are changing it to more
correct data type. And if you are
looking to the sales over here then what
we are doing over here is we are
handling the missing data and as well
the invalid data by deriving the column
from already existing one. And it is as
well very similar for the price. We are
handling as well the invalid data by
deriving it from specific calculation
over here. So those are the different
types of data transformations that you
have done in these
scripts. All right. Now let's keep
moving to the next system. We have the
customer AZ2. So here we have like only
three columns and let's start with the
ID first. So here again we have the
customer's informations and if we go and
check again our model you can see that
we can connect this table with the CRM
table customer info using the customer
key. So that means we have to go and
make sure that we can go and connect
those two tables. So let's go and check
the other table. We can go and check of
course the server layer. So let's query
it and we can query both of the tables.
Now we can see there is here like extra
characters that are not included in the
customer key from the CRM. So let's go
and search for example for this customer
over here where C ID like so we are
searching for customer has similar ID.
Now as you can see we are finding this
customer but the issue is that we have
those three characters NAS. There is no
specifications or explanation why we
have the NAS. So actually what we have
to do is to go and remove those
informations. We don't need it. So let's
again check the data. So it looks like
the old data have an NAS at the start
and then afterward we have new data
without those three characters. So we
have to clean up those ids in order to
be able to connect it with other tables.
So we're going to do it like this. We're
going to start with the case when since
we have like two scenarios in our data.
So if the C ID is like the three
characters in as so if the ID start with
those three characters then we're going
to go and apply transformation function
otherwise it's going to stay like it is.
So that's it. So now we have to go and
build the transformation. So we're going
to use substring and then we have to
define the string. It's going to be the
CD and then we have to define the
position where it start cutting or
extracting. So we can say 1 2 3 and then
four. So we have to define the position
number four. And then we have to define
the string how many characters should be
extracted. I will make it dynamic. So I
will go with the length. I will not go
and count how much. So we're going to
say the C ID. So it looks good. If it's
like NAS then go and extract from the CD
at the position number four the rest of
the characters. So let's go and execute
it. And I'm missing here a comma again
where we don't have any NAS at the
start. And if you scroll down you can
see those as well are not affected. So
with that we have now a nice ID to be
joined with other table. Of course we
can go and test it like this where then
we take the whole thing the whole
transformation and say not in we remove
of course the alias name we don't need
it. And then we make very simple
substring select
distinct CST key the customer key from
the silver table can be silver CRM cost
info. So that's it. So let's go and
check. So as you can see it is working
fine. So we are not able to find any
unmatching data between the customer
info from ERB and the CRM. But of course
after the transformation if you don't
use the transformation. So if I just
remove it like this, we will find a lot
of unmatching data. So this means our
transformation is working perfectly and
we can go and remove the original value.
So that's it for the first column. Okay.
Now moving on to the next field, we have
the birthday of the customers. So the
first thing to do is to check the data
type. It is a date. So it's fine. It is
not an integer or a string. So we don't
have to convert anything. But still
there is something to check with the
birth date. So we can check whether we
have something out of range. So for
example, we can go and check whether we
have really old dates at the birth
dates. So let's take 19, 100, and let's
say 24 and we can take the first date of
the month. So let's go and check that.
Well, it looks like that we have
customers that are older than 100 year.
Well, I don't know. Maybe this is
correct, but it sounds of course strange
to do the business. Of course.
Hey, this is Creed and he is in charge
of something. That is correct. Say hi to
the kids. Hi kids. Yay. And then we can
go and check the other boundary where it
is almost impossible to have a customer
that the birthday is in the future. So
we can say birth date is higher than the
current date like this. So let's go and
query this information. Well, it will
not work because we have to have like an
or between them. And now if we check the
list over here, we have dates that are
invalid for the birth dates. So all
those dates they are all per day in the
future and this is totally unacceptable.
So this is an indicator for bad data
quality. Of course you can go and report
it to the source system in order to
correct it. So here it's up to you what
to do with those dates. Either leave it
as it is as a bad data or we can go and
clean that up by replacing all those
dates with a null or maybe replacing
only the one that is extreme where it is
100% is incorrect. So let's go and write
the transformation for that. As usual,
we're going to start with case when
birth date is larger than the current
date and time then null. Otherwise, we
can have an else where we have the birth
date as it is and then we have an end as
birth date. So, let's go and execute it.
And with that, we should not get any
customer where the birthday in the
future. So, that's it for the birth
date. Now, let's move to the next one.
We have the gender. Now again the gender
informations is low cardalities. So we
have to go and check all the possible
values inside this column. So in order
to check all the possible values we're
going to use select distinct gen from
our table. So let's go and execute it.
And now the data doesn't look really
good. So we have here a null, we have an
f, we have here an empty string, we have
male, female, and again we have the M.
So this is not really good. And what
we're going to do, we're going to go and
clean up all those informations in order
to have only three values. Male, female,
and not available. So, we're going to do
it like this. We're going to say case
when and now we're going to go and trim
the values just to make sure there is
like no empty spaces. And as well, I'm
going to go and use the upper function
just to make sure that in the future if
we get any lower cases and so on, we are
covering all the different scenarios. So
case this is in F or let's say
female then make it as female and we can
go and do the same thing for the male
like this. So if it is an M or a male
make sure it is capital letters because
here we are using the upper then it is a
male otherwise all other scenarios it
should be not available. So whether it
is an empty string or nulls and so on.
So we have to have an end of course as
gen. So now let's go and test it and
check whether we have covered
everything. So you can see the M is now
male. The empty is not available. The F
is female. The empty string or maybe
spaces here is not available. Female
going to stay as it is. And the same for
the male. So with that we are covering
all the scenarios and we are following
our standards in the project. So I'm
going to go and cut this and put it in
our original query over here. So let's
go and execute the whole thing. And with
that we have cleaned up all those three
columns. Now the question is did we
change anything in the DDL? Well we
didn't change anything. We didn't
introduce any new column or change any
data type. So that means the next step
is we're going to go and insert it in
the server layer. So as usual we're
going to say here insert into silver ERP
the customer and then we're going to go
and list all the column names. So C ID
birth date and the gender. All right. So
let's go and execute it. And with that
we can see it inserted all the data. And
of course the very important step as the
next is to check the data quality. So
let's go back to our query over here and
change it from bronze to silver. So
let's go and check the silver layer.
Well of course we are getting those very
old customers but we didn't change that.
We only change the birthday that is in
the future and we don't see it here in
the results. So that means everything is
clean. So for the next one, let's go and
check the different genders. And as you
can see, we have only those three
values. And of course, we can go and
take a final look to our table. So you
can see the C ID here, the birth date,
the gender, and then we see our metadata
column. And everything looks amazing. So
that's it. What are the different types
of data transformations that we have
done? First with the ID, what we have
done, we have handled invalid values. So
we have removed this part where it is
not needed. And the same thing goes for
the birth dates. We have handled as well
invalid values. And then for the last
one, for the gender, we have done data
normalizations by mapping the code to
more friendly value. And as well, we
have handled the missing values. So
those are the types that we have done in
this
code. Okay. Moving on to the second
table, we have the location
informations. So we have ERP location
A101. So now here the task is easy
because we have only two columns and if
you go and check the integration model
we can find our table over here. So we
can go and connect it together with the
customer info from the other system
using a CID with the customer key. So
those two informations must be matching
in order to join the tables. So that
means we have to go and check the data.
So let's go and select the data CST key
from let's go and get the silver data
customer info. So let's go. Now if you
go and check the result you can see over
here that we have an issue with the CI
ID there is like a minus between the
characters and the numbers but the
customer ID the customer number we don't
have anything that splits the characters
with the numbers. So if you go and join
those two informations it will not be
working. So what we have to do we have
to go and get rid of this minus because
it is totally unnecessary. So let's go
and fix that. It's going to be very
simple. So what we're going to do we're
going to say CI ID. So we're going to go
and search for the minus and replace it
with nothing. It's very simple like
this. So let's go and query it again.
And with that things looks very similar
to each others. And as well we can go
and query it. So we're going to say
where our transformation is not in then
we can go and use this as a subquery
like this. So let's go and execute it.
And as you can see we are not finding
any unmatching data now. So that means
our transformation is working. And with
that we can go and connect those two
tables together. So if I take the
transformation away you can see that we
will find a lot of unmatching data. So
the transformation is okay. We're going
to stay with it. And now let's speak
about the countries. Now we have here
multiple values and so on. What I'm
going to do this is low cardinality and
we have to go and check all possible
values inside this column. So that means
we are checking whether the data is
consistent. So we can do it like this.
distinct the
country from our table. I'm just going
to go and copy it like this. And as
well, I'm going to go and sort the data
by the country. So, let's go and check
the informations. Now, you can see we
have a null. We have an empty string,
which is really bad. And then we have a
full name of country and then we have as
well an abbreviation of the countries.
Well, this is a mix. This is not really
good because sometimes we have DE and
sometimes we have Germany and then we
have the United Kingdom and then for the
United States we have like three
versions of the same information which
is as well not really good. So the
quality of the country is not really
good. So let's go and work on the
transformation. As usual we're going to
start with the case win. If trim
country is equal to D, then we're going
to transform it to Germany. And the next
one it's going to be about the USA. So
if trim country is in. So now let's go
and get those two values the US and the
USA. So US and USA then it's going to be
the United States states. So with us we
have covered as well those three cases.
Now we have to talk about the null and
the empty string. So we're going to say
when trim country is equal to empty
string or country is null then it's
going to be not available otherwise I
would like to get the country as it is.
So trim country just to make sure that
we don't have any leading or trailing
spaces. So that's it. Let's go and say
this is the country. So it is working
and the country information is
transformed. And now what I'm going to
do, I'm going to take the whole new
transformation and compare it to the old
one. Let me just call this as old
country and let's go and query it. So
now we can check those values state as
before. So nothing did change. The DE is
now Germany. The empty string is not
available. The null the same thing and
the United Kingdom stayed as like it's
like before. And now we have one value
for all those information. So it's only
the United States. So it looks perfect.
And with that we have cleaned as well
the second column. So with that we have
now clean results. And now the question
did we change anything in the DDL? Well
we haven't changed anything. Both of
them are varchar. So we can go now
immediately and insert it into our
table. So insert into silver customer
location. And here we have to specify
the columns. It's very simple the ID and
the country. So let's go and execute it.
And as you can see we got now inserted
all those values. Of course, as a next,
we go and double check those
informations. I would just go and remove
all those stuff as well here. And
instead of bronze, let's go with the
silver. So, as you can see, all the
values of the country looks good. And
let's have a final look to the table.
So, like this. So, we have the ids
without the separator. We have the
countries and as well our metadata
information. So, with that, we have
cleaned up the data for the location.
Okay. So now what are the different
types of data transformation that we
have done here is first we have handled
invalid values. So we have removed the
minus with an empty string and for the
country we have done data normalization.
So we have replaced codes with friendly
values and as well at the same time we
have handled missing values by replacing
the empty string and null with not
available. And one more thing of course
we have removed the unwanted spaces. So
those are the different types of
transformation that we have done for
this
table. Okay guys, now keep the energy
up, keep the spirit up. We have to go
and clean up the last table in the
bronze layer. And of course, we cannot
go and skip anything. We have to check
the quality and to detect all the
errors. So now we have a table about the
categories for the products. And here we
have like four columns. Let's go and
start with the first one, the ID. As you
can see in our integration model, we can
connect this table together with the
product info from the CRM using the
product key. And as you remember in the
silver layer, we have created an extra
column for that in the product info. So
if you go and select those data, you can
see we have a column called category ID
and this one is exactly matching the ID
that we have in this table and we have
done the testing. So this ID is ready to
be used together with the other table.
So there is nothing to do over here. And
now for the next columns they are
string. And of course we can go and
check whether there are any unwanted
spaces. So we are checking for the
unwanted spaces. So let's go and check
select start from and we're going to go
and get the same table like this here.
And first we are checking the category.
So the category is not equal to the
category after trimming the unwanted
spaces. So let's go and execute it. And
as you can see we don't have any
results. So there are no unwanted
spaces. Let's go and check the other
column. For example, the subcategory,
the next one. So let's get the
subcategory and run the query as well.
We don't have anything. So that means we
don't have unwanted spaces for the
subcategory. Let's go now and check the
last column. So I will just copy and
paste. Now let's get the maintenance and
let's go and execute. And as well, no
results. Perfect. We don't have any
unwanted spaces inside this table. So
now the next step is that we're going to
go and check the data standardizations
because all those columns has low
cardinality. So what we can do we can
say
select distinct let's get the cats
category from our table. I'll just copy
and paste it and check all values. So as
you can see we have the accessories,
bikes, clothing and components.
Everything looks perfect. We don't have
to change anything in this column. Let's
go and check the subcategory. And if you
scroll down, all values are friendly and
nice as well. Nothing to change here.
And let's go and check the last column,
the maintenance. Perfect. We have only
two values, yes and no. We don't have
any nulls. So my friends, that's means
this table has really nice data quality
and we don't have to clean up anything.
But still, we have to follow our
process. We have to go and load it from
the bronze to the silver even if we
didn't transform anything. So our job is
really easy. Here we're going to go and
say insert into silver dot ERP px and so
on. And we're going to go and define the
columns. So it's going to be the ID, the
category,
subcategory, maintenance. So that's it.
Let's go and insert the data. Now, as
usual, what we're going to do, we're
going to go and check the data. So
silver
ERP. Let's have a look. All right. So we
can see the ids are here, the
categories, the subcategories, the
maintenance and we have our meta column.
So everything is inserted correctly. All
right. So now I have all those queries
and the insert statements for all six
tables. And now what is important before
inserting any data, we have to make sure
that we are truncating and emptying the
table because if you run this query
twice, what's going to happen? You will
be inserting duplicates. So first
truncate the data and then do a full
load insert all data. So we're going to
have one step before it's like the
bronze layer. We're going to say
truncate table and then we will be
truncating the silver customer info and
only after that we have to go and insert
the data. And of course we can go and
give this nice information at the start.
So first we are truncating the table and
then inserting. So if I go and run the
whole thing. So let's go and do it. It
will be working. So if I can run it
again, we will not have any duplicates.
So we have to go and add this step
before each insert. So let's go and do
that. All right. So I'm done with all
tables. So now let's go and run
everything. So let's go and execute it.
And we can see in the messaging
everything working perfectly. So with
that we made all tables empty. And then
we inserted the
data. So perfect. With that we have a
nice script that loads the silver layer.
But of course like the front layer,
we're going to put everything in one
stored procedure. So let's go and do
that. We'll go to the beginning over
here and say create or alter procedure
and we're going to put it in the schema
silver and using the naming convention
load silver and we're going to go over
here and say begin and take the whole
code end it is long one and give it one
push with a tab and then at the end
we're going to say edge. Perfect. So we
have our stored procedure but we forgot
here the ass with that we will not have
any error. Let's go and execute it. So
the stored procedure is created. If you
go to the programmability and you will
find two procedures load bronze and load
silver. So now let's go and try it out.
All what you have to do is now only to
execute the silver load silver. So let's
execute the start procedure and with
that we will get the same results. This
third procedure now is responsible of
loading the whole silver layer. Now of
course the messaging here is not really
good because we have learned in the
bronze layer we can go and add many
stuff like handling the error doing nice
messaging catching the duration time. So
now your task is to pause the video take
this start procedure and go and
transform it to be very similar to the
bronze layer with the same messaging and
all the add-ons that we have added. So
pause the video now. I will do it as
well offline and I will see you
[Music]
soon. Okay. So I hope you are done and I
can show you the results. It's like the
bronze layer. We have defined at the
start few variables in order to catch
the duration. So we have the start time,
the end time, patch start time and patch
end time. And then we are printing a lot
of stuff in order to have like nice
messaging in the output. So at the start
we are saying loading the server layer
and then we start splitting by the
source system. So loading the CRM tables
and I'm going to show you only one table
for now. So we are setting the timer. So
we are saying start time get the date
and time informations to it. Then we are
doing the usual. We are truncating the
table and then we are inserting the new
informations after cleaning it up. And
we have this nice message. We will say
load duration where we are finding the
differences between the start time and
the end time using the function date
diff. And we want to show the result in
the seconds. So we are just printing how
long it took to load this table. And
we're going to go and repeat this
process for all the tables. And of
course we are putting everything in try
and catch. So the SQL going to go and
try to execute the try part. And if
there are any issues the SQL going to go
and execute the catch. And here we are
just printing few information like the
error message the error number and the
error states. And we are following
exactly the same standard at the bronze
layer. So let's go and execute the whole
thing. And with that we have updated the
definition of the third procedure. Let's
go now and execute it. So execute silver
dot load silver. So let's go and do
that. It went very fast like fewer than
1 seconds again because we are working
on local machine loading the server
layer loading the CRM tables and we can
see this nice messaging. So it start
with truncating the table inserting the
data and we are getting the load
duration for this table and you will see
that everything is below 1 second and
that's because in real projects you will
get of course more than 1 second. So at
the end we have load duration of the
whole silver layer. And now I have one
more thing for you. Let's say that you
are changing the design of this store
procedure for the server layer. You are
adding different types of messaging or
maybe you're creating logs and so on. So
now all those new ideas and redesigns
that you are doing for the silver layer,
you have always to think about bringing
the same changes as well in the other
store procedure for the pros layer. So
always try to keep your codes following
the same standards. Don't have like one
idea in one store procedure and an old
idea in another one. Always try to
maintain those scripts and to keep them
all up to date following the same
standards. Otherwise, it can be really
hard for other developers to understand
the cause. I know that needs a lot of
work and commitments, but this is your
job to make everything following the
best practices and following the same
naming convention and standards that you
put for your projects. So guys, now we
have very nice two ETL scripts. One that
loads the bronze layer and another one
for the server layer. So now our data
warehouse is very simple. All what you
have to do is to run first the bronze
layer and with that we are taking all
the data from the CSV files from the
source and we put it inside our data
warehouse in the bronze layer and with
that we are refreshing the whole bronze
layer. Once it's done the next step is
to run the store procedure of the server
layer. So once you execute it you are
taking now all the data from the bronze
layer transforming it cleaning it up and
then loading it to the server layer. And
as you can see the concept is very
simple. We are just moving the data from
one layer another layer with different
tasks. All right guys, so as you can see
in the server layer we have done a lot
of data transformations and we have
covered all the types that we have in
the data cleansing. So we remove
duplicates, data filtering, handling
missing data, invalid data, unwanted
spaces, casting the data types and so
on. And as well we have derived new
columns, we have done data enrichment
and we have normalized a lot of data. So
now of course what we have not done yet
business rules and logic data
aggregations and data integration. This
is for the next layer. All right my
friends. So finally we are done cleaning
up the data and checking the quality of
our data. So we can go and close those
two steps. And now to the next step we
have to go and extend the data flow
diagram. So let's
go. Okay. So now let's go and extend our
data flow for the silver layer. So, what
I'm going to do, I'm just going to go
and copy the whole thing and put it side
by side to the bronze layer. And let's
call it silver layer. And the table name
is going to stay as before because we
have like one to one like the bronze
layer. But what we're going to do, we're
going to go and change the coloring. So,
I'm going to go and mark everything and
make it gray like silver. And of course,
what is very important is to make the
lineage. So, I'm going to go now from
the bronze and take an arrow and put it
to the silver table. And now with that
we have like a lineage between three
layers and you are checking this table
the customer info you can understand aha
this comes from the bronze layer from
the customer info and as well this comes
from the source system CRM so now we can
see the lineage between different layers
and without looking to any scripts and
so on in one picture you can understand
the whole projects so I don't have to
explain a lot of stuff by just looking
to this picture you can understand how
the data is flowing between sources is
bronze layer, silver layer, and to the
gold layer, of course, later. So, as you
can see, it looks really nice and clean.
All right. So, with that, we have
updated the data flow. Next, we're going
to go and commit our work in the G repo.
So, let's
go. Okay. So, now let's go and commit
our scripts. We're going to go to the
folder scripts. And here we have a
server layer. If you don't have it, of
course, you can go and create it. So,
first we're going to go and put the DDL
scripts for the server layer. So let's
go and I will paste the code over here.
And as usual, we have this commit as the
header explaining the purpose of this
script. So let's go and commit our work.
And we're going to do the same thing for
the store procedure that loads the
server layer. So I'm going to go over
here. I have already filed for that. So
let's go and paste that. So we have here
our stored procedures. And as usual at
the start, we have as well. So this
script is doing the ATL process where we
load the data from bronze into silver.
So the action is to truncate the table
first and then insert transformed cleans
data from bronze to silver. There are no
parameters at all. And this is how you
can use the source procedure. Okay. So
we're going to go and commit our work.
And now one more thing that we want to
commit in our project all those queries
that you have built to check the quality
of the server layer. So this time we
will not put it in the scripts. We're
going to go to the tests and here we're
going to go and make a new file called
quality checks silver and inside it
we're going to go and paste all the
queries that we have filled. I just here
reorganize them by the tables. So here
we can see all the checks that we have
done during the course and at the header
we have here nice comments. So here we
are just saying that this script is
going to check the quality of the server
layer and we are checking for nulls,
duplicates, unwanted spaces, invalid
date range and so on. So that each time
you come up with a new quality check,
I'm going to recommend you to share it
with the project and with other team in
order to make it part of multiple checks
that you do after running the ATL. So
that's it. I'm going to go and put those
checks in our repo and in case I come up
with new check, I'm going to go and
update it. Perfect. So now we have our
code in our repository. All right. So
with that, our code is saved and we are
done with the whole epic. So we have
built the silver layer. Now let's go and
minimize it. And now we come to my
favorite layer, the code layer. So we're
going to go and build it. The first step
as usual, we have to analyze. And this
time we're going to explore the business
objects. So let's
go. All right. So now we come to the big
question. How we going to build the gold
layer? As usual, we start with
analyzing. So now what we're going to do
here is to explore and understand what
are the main business objects that are
hidden inside our source system. So as
you can see we have two sources six
files and here we have to identify what
are the business objects. Once we have
this understanding then we can start
coding and here the main transformation
that we are doing is data integration.
And here usually I split it into three
steps. The first one we're going to go
and build those business objects that we
have identified. And after we have a
business objects we have to look at it
and decide what is the type of this
table. Is it a dimension? Is it a fact?
Or is it like maybe a flat table? So
what type of table that we have built
and the last step is of course we have
now to rename all the columns into
something friendly and easy to
understand so that our consumers don't
struggle with technical names. So once
we have all those steps what we're going
to do it's time to validate what we have
created. So what we have to do the new
data model that we have created it
should be connectable and we have to
check that the data integration is done
correctly and once everything is fine we
cannot skip the last step. we have to
document and as well commit our work in
the g. And here we will be introducing a
new type of documentations. So we're
going to have a diagram about the data
model. We're going to build a data
dictionary where we're going to describe
the data model. And of course we're
going to extend the data flow diagram.
So this is our process. Those are the
main steps that we will do in order to
build the code
layer. Okay. So what is exactly data
moduling? Usually the source system
going to deliver for you row data
unorganized messy not very useful in its
current states. But now the data
modeling is the process of taking this
row data and then organize it and
structure it in meaningful way. So what
we are doing we are putting the data in
new friendly and easy to understand
objects like customers, orders,
products. Each one of them is focused on
specific information and what is very
important is we're going to describe the
relationship between those objects. So
by connecting them using lines. So what
you have built on the right side we call
it logical data model. If you compare to
the left side you can see the data model
makes it really easy to understand our
data and the relationship the processes
behind them. Now in data modeling we
have three different stages or let's say
three different ways on how to draw a
data model. The first stage is the
conceptual data model. Here the focus is
only on the entity. So we have
customers, orders, products and we don't
go in details at all. So we don't
specify any columns or attributes inside
those boxes. We just want to focus what
are the entities that we have and as
well the relationship between them. So
the conceptual data model don't focus at
all on the details. It just gives the
big picture. So the second data model
that we can build is the logical data
model. And here we start specifying what
are the different columns that we can
find in each entity like we have the
customer ID the first name last name and
so on and we still draw the relationship
between those entities and as well we
make it clear which columns are the
primary key and so on. So as you can see
we have here more details but one thing
we don't describe a lot of details for
each column and we are not worry how
exactly we going to store those tables
in the database. The third and last
stage we have the physical data model.
This is where everything gets ready
before creating it in the database. So
here you have to add all the technical
details like adding for each column the
data types and the length of each data
type and many other database techniques
and details. So again if you look to the
conceptual data model it gives us the
big picture and in the logical data
model we dive into details of what data
we need and the physical layer model
prepares everything for the
implementation in the database. And to
be honest in my projects I only draw the
conceptual and the logical data model
because drawing and building the
physical data model needs a lot of
efforts and time and there are many
tools like in data bricks they
automatically generate those models. So
in this project what we're going to do
we're going to draw the logical data
model for the gold
layer. All right. It's now for analytics
and especially for data warehousing and
business intelligence. We need a special
data model that is optimized for
reporting and analytics and it should be
flexible, scalable and as well easy to
understand. And for that we have two
special data models. The first type of
data model we have the star schema. It
has a central fact table in the middle
and surrounded by dimensions. The fact
table contains transactions, events, and
the dimensions contains descriptive
informations. And the relationship
between the fact table in the middle and
the dimensions around it forms like a
star shape. And that's why we call it
star schema. And we have another data
model called snowflake schema. It looks
very similar to the star schema. So we
have again the fact in the middle and
surrounded by dimensions. But the big
difference is that we break the
dimensions into smaller subdimensions.
And the shape of this data model as you
are extending the dimensions it's going
to looks like a snowflake. So now if you
compare them side by side you can see
that the star schema looks easier right?
So it is usually easy to understand easy
to query it is really perfect for
analyzers but it has one issue with the
dimension might contain duplicates and
your dimensions get bigger with the
time. Now if you compare it to the
snowflake you can see the schema is more
complex. You saw you need a lot of
knowledge and efforts in order to query
something from the snowflake. But the
main advantage here comes with the
normalization as you are breaking those
redundancies in small tables. You can
optimize the storage. But to be honest,
who care about the storage? So for this
project, I have chose to use the star
schema because it is very commonly used.
Perfect for reporting like for example
if you're using PowerBI and we don't
have to worry about the storage. So
that's why we're going to adopt this
model to build our gold layer.
Okay. So now one more thing about those
data models is that they contain two
types of tables fact and dimensions. So
when I say this is a fact table or a
dimension table well the dimension
contains descriptive informations or
like categories that gives some context
to your data. For example a product info
you have product name, category,
subcategories and so on. This is like a
table that is describing the products
and this we call it dimension. But in
the other hand we have facts. They are
events like transactions. They contain
three important informations. First you
have multiple ids from multiple
dimensions. Then we have like date
informations like when the transaction
or the event did happen. And the third
type of information you're going to have
like measures and numbers. So if you see
those three types of data in one table,
then this is a fact. So if you have a
table that answers how much or how many,
then this is a fact. But if you have a
table that answers who, what, where,
then this is a dimension table. So this
is what dimension and fact
tables. All right my friends. So so far
in the bronze layer and in the silver
layer we didn't discuss anything about
the business. So the bronze and silver
were very technical. We are focusing on
data ingestion. We are focusing on
cleaning up the data quality of the
data. But still the tables are very
oriented to the source system. Now comes
the fun part in the god layer where
we're going to go and break the whole
data model of the sources. So we're
going to create something completely new
to our business that is easy to consume
for business reporting and analyzes. And
here it is very important to have a
clear understanding of the business and
the processes. And if you don't know it
already at this phase you have really to
invest time by meeting maybe process
experts, the domain experts in order to
have clear understanding what we are
talking about in the data. So now what
we're going to do, we're going to try to
detect what are the business objects
that are hidden in the source systems.
So now let's go and explore that. All
right. Now in order to build a new data
model, I have to understand first the
original data model. What are the main
business objects that we have? How
things are related to each others? And
this is very important process in
building a new model. So now what I
usually do, I start giving labels to all
those tables. So if you go to the shapes
over here, let's go and search for
label. And if we go to more icons, I'm
going to go and take this label over
here. So, drag and drop it. And then I'm
going to go and increase maybe the size
of the font. So, let's go with 20 and
bold. Just make it a little bit bigger.
So, now by looking to this data model,
we can see that we have product
informations in the CRM and as well in
the ARP. And then we have like customer
informations and transactional table.
So, now let's focus on the product. So,
the product information is over here. We
have here the current and the history
product informations and here we have
the categories that's belong to the
products. So in our data model we have
something called products. So let's go
and create this label. It's going to be
the product and let's go and give it a
color to the style. Let's pick for
example the red one. Now let's go and
move this label and put it beneath this
table over here. And with that I have
like a label saying this table belongs
to the objects called products. Now I'm
going to do the same thing for the other
table over here. So I'm going to go and
tag this table to the product as well.
So that I can see easily which tables
from the sources does has informations
about the product business object. All
right. Now moving on, we have here a
table called customer information. So we
have a lot of information about the
customer. We have as well in the ARP
customer information where we have the
birthday and the country. So those three
tables has to do with the object
customer. So that means we're going to
go and label it like that. So let's call
it customer and I'm going to go and pick
different color for that. Let's go with
the green. So I will tag this table like
this. And the same thing for the other
tables. So copy tag the second table and
the third table. Now it is very easily
for me to see which table to belong to
which business objects. And now we have
the final table over here and only one
table about the sales and orders. In the
arb we don't have any informations about
that. So this one going to be easy.
Let's call it sales. And let's move it
over here. And as well maybe change the
color of that to for example this color
over here. Now this step is very
important by building any data model in
the gold layer. It gives you a big
picture about the things that you are
going to module. So now the next step is
that we're going to go and build those
objects step by step. So let's start
with the first objects with our
customers. So here we have three tables
and we're going to start with the CRM.
So let's start with this table over
here. All right. So with that we know
what are our business objects and this
task is done and now in the next step
we're going to go back to scale and
start doing data integrations and
building completely new data model. So
let's go and do
that. Now let's have a quick look to the
good layer specifications. So this is
the final stage. We're going to provide
data to be consumed by reporting and
analytics. And this time we will not be
building tables. We will be using views.
So that means we will not be having like
stored procedure or any load process to
the code layer. All what we are doing is
only data transformation and the focus
of the data transformation going to be
data integration, aggregation, business
logic and so on. And this time we're
going to introduce a new data model. We
will be doing star schema. So those are
the specifications for the gold layer
and this is our scope. So this time we
make sure that we are selecting data
from the silver layer not from the
bronze because the bronze has bad data
quality and the silver is everything is
prepared and cleaned up. In order to
build the good layer going to be
targeting the server layer. So let's
start with select star from and we're
going to go to the silver CRM customer
info. So let's go and hit execute. And
now we're going to go and select the
columns that we need to be presented in
the go layer. So let's start selecting
the columns that we want. So we have the
ID, the key, the first
name. I will not go and get the metadata
information. This only belongs to the
silver. Perfect. The next step is that
I'm going to go and give this table an
alias. So let's go and call it CI. And
I'm going to make sure that we are
selecting from this alias because later
we're going to go and join this table
with other tables. So something like
this. So we're going to go with those
columns. Now let's move to the second
table. Let's go and get the birthday
information. So now we're going to jump
to the other system and we have to join
the data by the CID together with the
customer key. So now we have to go and
join the data with another table. And
here I try to avoid using the inner join
because if the other table doesn't have
all the information about the customers,
I might lose customers. So always start
with the master table and if you join it
with any other table in order to get
informations try always to avoid inner
join because the other source might not
have all the customers and if you do
inner join you might lose customers. So
I tend to start from the master table
and then everything else is about the
lift join. So I'm going to say lift join
silver ERP customer a12. So let's give
it the alias ca. And now we have to join
the tables. So it's going to be by CE
from the first table. It's going to be
the customer key equal to CA and we have
the CI ID. Now of course we're going to
get matching data because we checked the
server layer. But if we haven't prepared
the data in the server layer, we have to
do here preparation step in order to
join the tables. But we don't have to do
that because that was a pre-step in the
server layer. So now you can see the
systematic that we have in this bronze,
silver, gold. So now after joining the
tables we have to go and pick the
information that we need from the second
table which is the birth date. So B date
dates and as well from this table there
is another nice information it is the
gender information. So that's all what
we need from the second table. Let's go
and check the third table. So the third
table is about the location information
the countries and as well we connect the
tables by the CID with the key. So let's
go and do that. We're going to say as
well left join silver ERP location and
I'm going to give it the name LA and
then we have to join Y the keys the same
thing it's going to be CI customer key
equal to LA CI ID again we have prepared
those ids and keys in the server layer
so the join should be working now we
have to go and pick the data from the
second table so what do we have over
here we have the ID the country and the
metadata information so let's go and
just get the country Perfect. So now
with that we have joined all the three
tables and we have picked all the
columns that we want in this object. So
again by looking over here we have
joined this table with this one and this
one. So with that we have collected all
the customer informations that we have
from the two source systems. Okay. So
now let's go and query in order to make
sure that we have everything correct and
in order to understand that your joints
are correct you have to keep your eye in
those three columns. So if you are
seeing that you are getting data that
means you are doing the the joints
correctly but if you are seeing a lot of
nulls or no data at all that means your
joints are incorrect but now it looks
for me it is working and another check
that I do is that if your first table
has no duplicates what could happen is
that after doing multiple joins you
might now start getting duplicates
because the relationship between those
tables is not clear one to one you might
get like one to many relationship ship
or many to many relationships. So now
the check that I usually do at this
stage is that I have to make sure that I
don't have duplicates from their
results. So we don't have like multiple
rows for the same customer. So in order
to do that, we go and do a quick group
by. So we're going to group by the data
by the customer ID and then we do the
count from this subquery. So this is the
whole subquery and then after that we're
going to go and say group by the
customer ID and then we say having
count higher than one. So this query
actually try to find out whether we have
any duplicates in the primary key. So
let's go and execute it. We don't have
any duplicates and that means after
joining all those tables with the
customer info those tables didn't cause
any issues and didn't duplicate my data.
So this is very important check to make
sure that you are in the right way. All
right. So that means everything is fine
about the duplicates. We don't have to
worry about it. Now we have here an
integration issue. So let's go and
execute it again. And now if you look to
the data we have two sources for the
gender informations. one comes from the
CRM and another one come from the ERP.
So now the question is what we're going
to do with this? Well, we have to do
data integration. So let me show you how
I do it. First I go and have a new query
and then I'm going to go and remove all
other stuff and I'm going to leave only
those two informations and use it
distinct just to focus on the
integration and let's go and execute it
and maybe as well to do an order by. So
let's do one and two. Let's go and
execute it again. So now here we have
all the scenarios and we can see
sometimes there is a matching. So from
the first table we have female and the
other table we have as well female but
sometimes we have an issue like those
two tables are giving different
informations and the same thing over
here. So this is as well an issue
different informations. Another scenario
where we have a data from the first
table like here we have the female but
in the other table we have not
available. Well this is not a problem.
So we can get it from the first table
but we have as well the exact opposite
scenario where from the first table the
data is not available but it is
available from the second table. And now
here you might wonder why I'm getting a
null over here. We did handle all the
missing data in the silver layer and we
replace everything with not available.
So why we are still in getting a null?
This null doesn't come directly from the
tables. It just come because of joining
tables. So that means there are
customers in the CRM table that is not
available in the ARB table and if there
is like no match what going to happen we
will get a null from SQL. So this null
means there was no match and that's why
we are getting this null. It is not
coming from the content of the tables
and this is of course an issue. But now
the big issue what can happen for those
two scenarios here we have the data but
they are different. And here again we
have to ask the experts about it. What
is the master here? Is it the CRM system
or the ARP? And let's say from their
answer going to say the master data for
the customer information is the CRM. So
that means the CRM informations are more
accurate than the ERP information and
this is only about the customers of
course. So for this scenario where we
have female and male then the correct
information is the female from the first
source system. The same goes over here
and here we have like male and female
then the correct one is the male because
this source system is the master. Okay.
So now let's go and build this business
rule. We're going to start as usual with
the case win. So the first very
important rule is if we have a data in
the gender information from the CRM
system from the master then go and use
it. So we're going to go and check the
gender information from the CRM table.
So customer gender is not equal to not
available. So that means we have a value
male or female. Let me just have here a
comma like this. Then what's going to
happen? Go and use it. So we're going to
use the value from the master. CRM is
the master for gender info. Now
otherwise that means it is not available
from the CRM table. Then go and use and
grab the information from the second
table. So we're going to say CA gender.
But now we have to be careful with this
null over here. We have to convert it to
not available as well. So we're going to
use the
kis. So if this is a null then go and
use the not available like this. So
that's it. Let's have an end. And let me
just push this over here. So let's go
and call it new gen for now. Let's go
and execute it and let's go and check
the different scenarios. All those
values over here we have data from the
CRM system and this is as well
represented in the new column. But now
for the second part we don't have data
from the first system. So we are trying
to get it from the second system. So for
the first one is not available and then
we try to get it from the second source
system. So now we are activating the
else. Well it is null and with that the
kalis is activated and we are replacing
the null with not available. For the
second scenario as well, the first
search system don't have the gender
information. That's why we are grabbing
it from the second. So with that we have
a female. And then the third one the
same thing we don't have information but
we get it from the second source system.
We have the male and the last one it is
not available in both source systems.
That's why we are getting not available.
So with that as you can see we have a
perfect new column where we are
integrating two different source system
in one. And this is exactly what we call
data integration. This piece of
information, it is way better than the
source CRM and as well the source ARP.
It is more rich and has more
information. And this is exactly why we
try to get data from different source
system in order to get rich information
in the data warehouse. So with that we
have a nice logic and as you can see
it's way easier to separate it in
separate query in order first to build
the logic and then take it to the
original query. So what I'm going to do,
I'm just going to go and copy everything
from here and go back to our query. I'm
going to go and delete those
informations the gender and I will put
our new logic over here. So a comma and
let's go and execute. So with that we
have our new nice column. Now with that
we have very nice objects. We don't have
duplicates and we have integrated data
together. So we took three tables and we
put it in one object. Now the next step
is that we're going to go and give nice
friendly names. The rule in the gold
layer that to use friendly names and not
to follow the names that we get from the
source system and we have to make sure
that we are following the rules by the
naming conventions. So we are following
the snake case. So let's go and do it
step by step. For the first one let's go
and call it the customer ID. And then
the next one I will get rid of using
keys and so on. I'm going to go and call
it customer number because those are
customer numbers. Then for the next one,
we're going to call it first name
without using any prefixes. And the next
one last name and we have here marital
status. So I will be using the exact
name but without the prefix. And here we
just going to call it gender. And this
one we're going to call it career date.
And this one birth date. And the last
one going to be the country. So let's go
and execute it. Now as you can see the
names are really friendly. So we have
customer ID, customer numbers, first
name, last name, material status,
gender. So as you can see the names are
really nice and really easy to
understand. Now the next step I'm going
to think about the order of those
columns. So the first two it makes sense
to have it together. The first name,
last name, then I think the country is
very important information. So I'm going
to go and get it from here and put it
exactly after the last name is just
nicer. So let's go and execute it again.
So the first name, last name, country.
It's always nice to group up relevant
columns together, right? So we have here
the status of the gender and so on. And
then we have the career date and the
birth date. I think I'm going to go and
switch the birth date with the career
date. It's more important than the
career dates like this. And here not
forget the comma. So execute again. So
it looks wonderful. Now comes a very
important decision about these objects.
Is it a fact table or a dimension? Well,
as we learned, dimensions hold
descriptive informations about an
object. And as you can see, we have here
a descriptions about the customers. So
all those columns are describing the
customer information. And we don't have
here like transactions and events. And
we don't have like measures and so on.
So we cannot say this object is a fact.
It is clearly a dimension. So that's why
we're going to go and call this object
the dimension customer. Now there is one
thing that if you are creating a new
dimension you need always a primary key
for the dimension. Of course we can go
over here and depend on the primary key
that we get from the source system but
sometimes you can have like dimensions
where you don't have like a primary key
that you can count on. So what we have
to do is to go and generate a new
primary key in the data warehouse. And
those primary keys we call it surrogate
keys. Srogate keys are system generated
unique identifier that is assigned to
each records to make the record unique.
It is not a business key. It has no
meaning and no one in the business knows
about it. We only use it in order to
connect our data model. And in this way
we have more control on how to connect
our data model and we don't have to
depend always on the source system. And
there are different ways on how to
generate surrogate keys like defining it
in the DDL or maybe using the window
function row number in this data
warehouse. I'm going to go with a simple
solution where we're going to go and use
the window function. So now in order to
generate a surrogate key for this
dimension what we're going to do it is
very simple. So we're going to say row
number over and here we have to order by
something. You can order by the create
date or the customer ID or the customer
number. whatever you want but in this
example I'm going to go and order by the
customer ID. So we have to follow the
naming convention that all surrogate
keys with a key at the end as a suffix.
So now let's go and query those
informations. And as you can see at the
start we have a customer key and this is
a sequence. We don't have here of course
any duplicates. And now this target key
is generated in the data warehouse and
we're going to use this key in order to
connect the data model. So now with that
our query is ready and the last step is
that we're going to go and create the
object and as we decided all the objects
in the gold layer going to be virtual
one. So that means we're going to go and
create a view. So we're going to say
create view gold dot dim. So follow the
naming convention stand for the
dimension and we're going to have the
customers and then after that we have
ass. So with that everything is ready.
Let's go and execute it. It was
successful. Let's go to the views now
and you can see our first objects. So we
have the dimension customers in the gold
layer. Now as you know me in the next
step that we're going to go and check
the quality of this new objects. So
let's go and have a new query. So select
star from our view temp customers. And
now we have to make sure that everything
in the right position like this. And now
we can do different checks like the
uniqueness and so on. But I'm worried
about the gender information. So let's
go and have a distinct of all values. So
as you can see it is working perfectly.
We have only female, male and not
available. So that's it with that. We
have our first new
dimension. Okay friends. So now let's go
and build the second object. We have the
products. So as you can see product
information is available in both source
systems. As usual, we're going to start
with the CRM informations and then we're
going to go and join it with the other
table in order to get the category
informations. So those are the columns
that we want from this table. Now we
come here to a big decision about this
objects. This object contains historical
informations and as well the current
informations. Now of course depend on
the requirement whether you have to do
analyszis on the historical
informations. But if you don't have such
a requirements we can go and stay with
only the current informations of the
products. So we don't have to include
all the history in the objects and it is
anyway as we learned from the model over
here we are not using the primary key we
are using the product key. So now what
we have to do is to filter out the
historical data and to stay only with
the current data. So we're going to have
here a wear condition. And now in order
to select the current data what we're
going to do we're going to go and target
the end dates. If the end date is null
that means it is a current data. Let's
take this example over here. So you can
see here we have three records for the
same product key and for the first two
records we have here an information in
the end dates because it is historical
informations but the last record over
here we have it as a null and that's
because this is the current information
it is open and it's not closed yet. So
in order to select only the current
informations it is very simple we can
say brd in dates is null. So if you go
now and execute it, you will get only
the current products. You will not have
any history. And of course we can go and
add comment to it. Filter out all
historical data. And this means of
course we don't need the end date in our
selection of course because it is always
a null. So with that we have only the
current data. Now the next step is that
we have to go and join it with the
product categories from the ERP. And
we're going to use here the ID. So as
usual the master information is the CRM
and everything else going to be
secondary. That's why I use the lift
join just to make sure I'm not losing
I'm not filtering any data because if
there is no match then we lose data. So
lift join silver ERP and the category.
So let's call it PC. And now what we're
going to do we're going to go and join
it using the key. So en from the CRM we
have the category ID equal to PC ID. And
now we have to go and pick columns from
the second table. So it's going to be
the PC. We have the category very
important PC. We have the
subcategory and we can go and get the
maintenance. So something like this.
Let's go and query. And with that we
have all those columns comes from the
first table and those three comes from
the second. So with that we have
collected all the product informations
from the two source systems. Now the
next step is we have to go and check the
quality of these results. And of course
what is very important is to check the
uniqueness. So what we're going to do
we're going to go and have the following
query. I want to make sure that the
product key is
unique because we're going to use it
later in order to join the table with
the sales. So
from and then we have to have group by
product key and we're going to say
having
counts higher than one. So let's go and
check. Perfect. We don't have any
duplicates. The second table didn't
cause any duplicates for our join. And
as well this means we don't have
historical data and each product is only
one records and we don't have any
duplicates. So I'm really happy about
that. So let's go and query again. Now,
of course, the next step, do we have
anything to integrate together? Do we
have the same information twice? Well,
we don't have that. The next step is
that we're going to go and group up the
relevant informations together. So, I'm
going to say the product ID, then the
product key, and the product name are
together. So, all those three
informations are together. And after
that, we can put all the category
informations together. So, we're going
to have the category ID, the category
itself, the subcategory. Let me just
query and see the results. So we have
the product ID key name and then we have
the category ID name and the subcategory
and then maybe as well to put the
maintenance after the subcategory like
this and I think the product cost and
the line can start could stay at the
end. So let me just check. So those
three four informations about the
category and then we have the cost line
and the start date. I'm really happy
with that. The next step we're going to
go and give nice names, friendly names
for those columns. So let's start with
the first one. This is the product ID.
The next one going to be the product
number. We need the key for the
surrogate key later. And then we have
the product name. And after that we have
the category ID and the category. And
this is the subcategory. And then the
next one going to stay as it is. I don't
have to rename it. The next one going to
be the cost and the product line and the
last one going to be the start stage. So
let's go and execute it. Now we can see
very nicely in the output all those
friendly names for the columns and it
looks way nicer than before. I don't
have even to describe those informations
the name describe it. So perfect. Now
the next big decision is what do we have
here? Do we have a fact or dimension?
What do you think? Well, as you can see
here again, we have a lot of
descriptions about the products. So all
those informations are describing the
business object products. We don't have
like here transactions, events, a lot of
different keys and ids. So we don't have
really here facts. We have a dimension.
Each row is exactly describing one
object, describing one product. That's
why this is a dimension. Okay. So now
since this is a dimension, we have to go
and create a primary key for it. Well,
actually the surrogate key and as we
have done it for the customers, we're
going to go and use the window function
row number in order to generate it over
and then we have to sort the data. I
will go with the start date. So let's go
with the start dates and as well the
product key and we're going to give it a
name products key like this. So let's go
and execute it. With that, we have now
generated a primary key for each product
and we're going to be using it in order
to connect our data model. All right.
Now, the next step with that, we're
going to go and build the view. So,
we're going to say create view. We're
going to say gold and dimension products
and then us. So, let's go and create our
object. And now, if you go and refresh
the views, you will see our second
object, the second dimension. So, we
have here in the gold layer the
dimension products. And as usual, we're
going to go and have a look to this view
just to make sure that everything is
fine. So dem products. So let's execute
it. And by looking to the data
everything looks nice. So with that we
have now two
dimensions. All right friends. So with
that we have covered a lot of stuff. So
we have covered the customers and the
products and we are left with only one
table where we have the transactions the
sales and for the sales information we
have only data from the CRM. We don't
have anything from the ERP. So let's go
and build it. Okay. So now I have all
those informations and now of course we
have only one table. We don't have to do
any integrations and so on. And now we
have to answer the big question. Do we
have here a dimension or a fact? Well by
looking to those details we can see
transactions. We can see events. We have
a lot of dates, informations. We have as
well a lot of measures and metrics and
as well we have a lot of ids. So it is
connecting multiple dimensions. And this
is exactly a perfect setup for effect.
So we're going to go and use those
informations as a facts. And of course
as we learned a fact is connecting
multiple dimensions. We have to present
in this fact the surrogate keys that
comes from the dimensions. So those two
informations the product key and the
customer ID those informations comes
from the source system and as we learned
we want to connect our data model using
the surrogate keys. So what we're going
to do we're going to replace those two
informations with the surrogate keys
that we have generated and in order to
do that we have to go and join now the
two dimensions in order to get the
surrogate key and we call this process
of course data lookup. So we are joining
the tables in order only to get one
information. So let's go and do that. We
will go with a lift join of course not
to lose any transaction. So first we're
going to go and join it with the product
key. Now of course in the silver layer
we don't have any surrogate keys. We
have it in the gold layer. So that means
for the fact table we're going to be
joining the silver layer together with
the gold layer. So, gold dots and then
the dimension products and I'm going to
just call it PR. And we're going to join
the SD using the product key together
with the product
number from the dimension. And now the
only information that we need from the
dimension is the key, the surrogate key.
So, we're going to go over here and say
product key. And what I'm going to do,
I'm going to go and remove this
information from here because we don't
need it. We don't need the original
product key from the source system. We
need the surrogate key that we have
generated in our own in this data
warehouse. So the same thing going to
happen as well for the customer. So gold
dimension customer again we are doing
here a lookup in order to get the
information on SD. So we are joining
using this ID over here equal to the
customer ID because this is a customer
ID. And what we're going to do the same
thing we need the surrogate key the
customer key and we're going to delete
the ID because we don't need it. Now we
have the surrogate key. So now let's go
and execute it. And now with that we
have in our fact table the two keys from
the dimensions. And now this can help us
to connect the data model to connect the
facts with the dimensions. So this is
very necessary step building the fact
table. You have to put the surrogate
keys from the dimensions in the facts.
So that was actually the hardest part
building the facts. Now the next step
all what you have to do is to go and
give friendly names. So we're going to
go over here and say order number. Then
the surrogate keys are already friendly.
So we're going to go over here and say
this is the order date. And the next one
going to be shipping date. And then the
next one due age and the sales going to
be I'm going to say sales
amount the
quantity and the final one is the price.
So now let's go and execute it and look
to the results. So now as you can see
the columns looks very friendly and now
about the order of the columns we use
the following schema. So first in the
fact table we have all the surrogate
keys from the dimensions. Then second we
have all the dates and at the end you
group up all the measures and the
metrics at the end of the fact. So
that's it for the query for the facts.
Now we can go and build it. So we're
going to say
create view gold in the gold layer and
this time we're going to use the fact
underscore and we're going to go and
call it sales and then don't forget
about the ass. So that's it. Let's go
and create it. Perfect. Now we can see
the fact. So with that we have three
objects in the go there. We have two
dimensions and one facts. And now of
course the next step with that we're
going to go and check the quality of the
view. So let's have a simple
select fact sales. So let's execute it.
Now by checking the result you can see
it is exactly like the result from the
query and everything looks nice. Okay.
So now one more trick that I usually do
after building effect is try to connect
the whole data model in order to find
any issues. So let's go and do that. We
will do just simple lift join with the
dimensions. So gold dimension customers
see and we will use the
keys and then we're going to say where
customer key is null. So there is no
matching. So let's go and execute it.
And with that as you can see in the
results we are not getting anything that
means everything is matching perfectly
and we can do as well the same thing
with the products. So left join called
then products p on product key and then
we connect it with the fact product key
and then we going go and check the
product key from the dimension like
this. So we are checking whether we can
connect the fact together with the
dimension products. Let's go and check
and as you can see as well we are not
getting anything and this is all right.
So with that we have now SQL codes that
is tested and as well creating the gold
layer. Now in the next step as you know
in our requirements we have to make
clear documentations for the end users
in order to use our data model. So let's
go and draw a data model of the star
schema. So let's go and draw our data
model. Let's go and search for a table.
And now what I'm going to do, I'm going
to go and take this one where I can say
what is the primary key and what is the
foreign key. And I'm going to go and
change a little bit the design. So it's
going to be rounded. And let's say I'm
going to go and change to this color.
And maybe go to the size, make it 16.
And then I'm going to go and select all
the columns and make it as well 16 just
to increase the size. And then go to our
range and we can go and increase it 39.
So now let's go and zoom in a little bit
for the first table. Let's go and call
it gold dimension customers and make it
a little bit bigger like this. And now
we're going to go and define here the
primary key. It is the customer key. And
what else we're going to do? We're going
to go and list all the columns in the
dimension. It is a little bit annoying
but the result is going to be awesome.
So what do we have? The customer ID. We
have the customer number and then we
have the first name. Now in case you
want a new rows so you can hold control
and enter and you can go and add the
other columns. So now pause the video
and then go and create the two
dimensions the customers and the
products and add all the columns that
you have built in the
[Music]
view. Welcome back. So now I have those
two dimensions. The third one going to
be the fact table. Now for the fact
table I'm going to go with different
color. for example, the blue and I'm
going to go and put it in the middle.
Something like this. So, we're going to
say gold fact sales and here for that we
don't have primary key. So, we're going
to go and delete it. And I have to go
and add all the columns of the facts.
So, order number, products key, customer
key. Okay. All right. Perfect. Now, what
we can do, we can go and add the foreign
key information. So, the product key is
a foreign key for the products. So,
we're going to say FK1. And the customer
key going to be the foreign key for the
customers. So FK2 and of course you can
go and increase the spacing for that.
Okay. So now after we have the tables
the next step in data modeling is to go
and describe the relationship between
these tables. This is of course very
important for reporting and analytics in
order to understand how I'm going to go
and use the data model. And we have
different types of relationships. We
have one to one, one to many. And in
star schema data model the relationship
between the dimension and the fact is
one to many. And that's because in the
table customers we have for a specific
customer only one record describing the
customer but in the fact table the
customer might exist in multiple records
and that's because customers can order
multiple times. So that's why in fact it
is many and in the dimension side it is
one. Now in order to see all those
relationships we're going to go to the
menu to the left side and as you can see
we have here entity relations and now we
have different types of arrows. So for
example we have zero to many, one to
many, one to one and many different
types of relations. So now which one we
going to take? We're going to go and
pick this one. So it says one mandatory.
So that means the customer must exist in
the dimension table. Too many but it is
optional. So here we have three
scenarios. The customer didn't order
anything or the customer did order only
once or the customer did order many
things. So that's why in the fact table
it is optional. So we're going to take
this one and place it over here. So
we're going to go and connect this part
to the customer dimension and the many
parts to the facts. Well actually we
have to do it on the customers. So with
that we are describing the relationship
between the dimensions and fact with one
to many. One is mandatory for the
customer dimension and many is optional
to the facts. So we have the same story
as well for the products. So the many
part to the facts and the one goes to
the products. So it's going to look like
this. Each time you are connecting new
dimension to the fact table, it is
usually one to many relationship. So you
can go and add anything you want to this
model like for example a text like
explaining something. For example, if
you have some complicated calculations
and so on, you can go and write this
information over here. So for example,
we can say over here sales calculation,
we can make it a little bit smaller. So
let's go with 18. So we can go and write
here the formula for that. So sales
equal quantity multiplied with the price
and make this little bit bigger. So it
is really nice info that we can add it
to the data model and even we can go and
link it to the column. So we can go and
take this arrow for example put it like
this and link it to the column and with
that you have as well nice explanation
about the business rule or the
calculation. So you can go and add any
descriptions that you want to the data
model. Just to make it clear for anyone
that is using your data model. So with
that you don't have only like three
tables in the database. You have as well
like some kind of documentations and
explanation. In one click we can see how
the data model is built and how you can
connect the tables together. It is
amazing really for all users of your
data model. All right. So now with that
we have really nice data model. And now
in the next step we're going to go and
create quickly a data catalog.
All right, great. So with that we have a
data model and we can say we have
something called a data products and we
will be sharing this data product with
different types of users and there is
something that every data products
absolutely needs and that is the data
catalog. It is a document that can
describe everything about your data
model. columns, the tables, maybe the
relationship between the tables as well.
And with that, you make your data
product clear for everyone. And it's
going to be for them way easier to
derive more insights and reports from
your data product. And what is the most
important one? It is time-saving because
if you don't do that, what's going to
happen? Each consumer, each user of your
data product will keep asking you the
same questions about what do you mean
with this column? What is this table?
How to connect the table A with the
table P? and you will keep repeating
yourself and explaining stuff. So
instead of that you prepare a data
catalog, a data model and you deliver
everything together to the users and
with that you are saving a lot of time
and stress. I know it is annoying to
create a data catalog but it is
investments and best practices. So now
let's go and create one. Okay. So now in
order to do that I have created a new
file called data catalog in the folder
documents. And here what we're going to
do is very straightforward. We're going
to make a section for each table in the
code layer. So for example we have here
the table dimension customers. What you
have to do first is to describe this
table. So we are saying it stores
details about the customers with the
demographics and geographics data. So
you give a short description for the
table and then after that you're going
to go and list all your columns inside
this table and maybe as well the data
type. But what is way important is the
description for each column. So you give
a very short description like for
example here the gender of the customer.
And now one of the best practices of
describing a column is to give examples
because you can understand quickly the
purpose of the columns by just seeing an
example. Right? So here we are saying we
can find inside the male, female and not
available. So with that the consumer of
your table can immediately understand uh
it will not be an M or an F. It's going
to be a full friendly value without
having them to go and query the content
of the table. They can understand
quickly the purpose of that column. So
with that we have a full description for
all the columns of our dimension. The
same thing we're going to do for the
products. So again, a description for
the table and as well a description for
each column and the same thing for the
facts. So that's it. With that you have
like a data catalog for your data
products at the code layer. And with
that the business user or the data
analyst have better and clear
understanding of the content of your
code layer. All right my friends. So
that's all for the data catalog. In the
next step we're going to go back to DO
where we're going to finalize the data
flow diagram. So let's go.
Okay. So now we're going to go and
extend our data flow diagram, but this
time for the gold layer. So now let's go
and copy the whole thing from the silver
layer and put it over here side by side.
And of course we're going to go and
change the coloring to the gold. And now
we're going to go and rename stuff. So
this is the gold layer. But now of
course we cannot leave those tables like
this. We have completely new data model.
So what do we have over here? We have
the fact sales, we have dimension
customers, and as well we have dimension
products. So now what I'm going to do,
I'm going to go and remove all those
stuff. We have only three tables. And
let's go and put those three tables
somewhere here in the center. So now
what you have to do is to go and start
connecting those stuff. I'm going to go
with this arrow over here, direct
connection, and start connecting stuff.
So the sales details goes to the fact
table. Maybe put the fact table over
here. And then we have the dimension
customer. This comes from the CRM
customer info. And we have two tables
from the ERP. It comes from this table
as well. And the location from the ERP.
Now the same thing goes for the
products. It comes from the product info
and comes from the categories from the
ERP. Now, as you can see here, we have
cross arrows. So what you can do, we can
go and select everything and we can say
line jumps with a gap. And this makes it
a little bit like better in the visual
for the arrows. So now for example if
someone asks you where the data come
from for the dimension products you can
open this diagram and tell them okay
this comes from the server layer. We
have like two tables. The product info
from the CRM and as well the categories
from the ERP and those several tables
comes from the bronze layer and you can
see the product info comes from the CRM
and the category comes from the ERP. So
it is very simple. We have just created
a full data lineage for our data
warehouse from the sources into the
different layers in our data warehouse
and data lineage is this really amazing
documentation that can help not only
your users but as well the developers.
All right. So with that we have very
nice data flow diagram and a data
lineage. All right. So we have completed
the data flow. It's really feel like
progress like achievements as we are
clicking through all those tasks. And
now we come to the last task in building
the data warehouse where we're going to
go and commit our work in the get
repo. Okay. So now let's put our scripts
in the project. So we're going to go to
the scripts over here. We have here
bronze silver but we don't have a gold.
So let's go and create a new file. We're
going to have gold/ and then we're going
to say ddl gold.sql. So now we're going
to go and paste our views. So we have
here our three views. And as usual at
the start we can describe the purpose of
the views. So we are saying create gold
views. This script can go and create
views for the code layer and the code
layer represent the final dimension and
fact tables. The star schema each view
perform transformations and combination
data from the server layer to produce
business ready data sets and those views
can be used for analytics and reporting.
So that's it. Let's go and commit it.
Okay. So with that as you can see we
have the bronze the silver. So we have
all our ETLs and scripts in the
repository. And now as well for the code
layer, we're going to go and add all
those quality checks that we have used
in order to validate the dimensions and
facts. So we're going to go to the test
over here and we're going to go and
create a new file. It's going to be
quality checks gold and the file type is
SQL. So now let's go and paste our
quality checks. So we have the check for
the fact, the two dimensions and as well
an explanation about the script. So we
are validating the integrity and the
accuracy of the go layer. And here we
are checking the uniqueness of the
surrogate keys and whether we are able
to connect the data model. So let's put
that as well in our git and commit the
changes. And in case we come up with a
new quality checks, we're going to go
and add it to our script here. So those
checks are really important if you are
modifying the ATLs or you want to make
sure that after each those script should
run and so on. It is like a quality gate
to make sure that everything is fine in
the gold layer. Perfect. So now we have
our code in our repository. Okay
friends. So now what you have to do is
to go and finalize the get repo. So for
example all the documentations that we
have created during the projects we can
go and upload them in the docs. So for
example you can see here the data
architecture the data flow data
integration data model and so on. So
that each time you edit those pages you
can commit your work and you have like a
version of that. And another thing that
you can do is that you go to the readme
like for example over here I have added
the project overview some important
links and as well the data architecture
and a little description of the
architecture of course and of course
don't forget to add few words about
yourself and important profiles in the
different social medias. All right my
friends. So with that we have committed
our work and as well closed the last
epic building the god layer and with
that we have completed all the phases of
building a data warehouse. Everything is
100% and this feels really nice. All
right my friends. So with that we have
covered the first type of SQL projects
that data warehousing projects. This is
usually a very complex project that you
can get involved in a company and this
is really amazing project if you are
planning to be a data engineer. But of
course, if you are a data analyst, you
might end up as well building
warehouses. So now we have everything
prepared for the second type of projects
in SQL. We will deep dive now into the
exploratory data analyzers. So let's
go. And now here we're going to cover
the second type of projects where we're
going to use our basic SQL skills in
order to do something called data
profiling where we're going to try to
understand all the aspects of our data
sets using simple aggregations like the
sum, average, count and as well we will
be using techniques like some
[Music]
queries. All right my friends. So the
first step in any data project is that
we need data sets. If you have done the
previous project where we have built the
SQL data warehouse, then you have
everything the data and the database. So
you don't have to worry about it. But if
you skip that, which I don't recommend,
I still have prepared for you the files
and the database. So let's get the data
and create our database. All right. So
now if you go to the link in the
description, we're going to go to the
downloads. And of course, you can
subscribe to my newsletter. And then
here we have the SQL course materials.
And here we have a link for data
analytics projects. Let's go to the
link. And now here you have some
important links like downloading the
server the management studio where we're
going to write our SQLs and as well
there is a link to the g repository and
as well what is very important is to
download all the project files. So click
on that and download all the files. Now
extract the file and put it somewhere
safe at your PC and now inside it you
can find all the scripts and the data
sets. Now there is like three ways on
how to create the database in SQL
server. So the first one is by executing
scripts. If you go to the scripts over
here, the first one we have a file
called init database. Just go inside it
and copy the whole thing and then let's
go to SQL server. Now make a new query
and make sure you switch to the master
database and then paste the whole code.
So now what you are doing here is we are
creating a new database. We are creating
a schema and then three very important
tables that we're going to use in our
data analyzes. Now there is like only
one thing that you have to change in
this script and that is the path of the
files. And once you have done that just
go and execute the whole script. And now
as you can see everything is done and
there is like data inserted. Now if you
go to the left side to the database and
refresh you can find a new database
called data warehouse analytics. And if
you go inside the tables you will find
our three tables customer products and
sales. So this is one way on how to
create the database. The second methods
is to go to the databases over here.
Right click on it and say new database.
And for example, let's call it data
warehouse analytics. I'm going to call
it two because I have already one. And
then click okay. And with that you have
a new database. So what we're going to
do now, we're going to right click on it
and then go to tasks and then import
flat file. And now what we're going to
do, we're going to go and import the CSV
files to our new database. So we can go
next and then you have to go and locate
your files. I have them somewhere over
here. So data set CSV files and we have
to focus on the gold tables. So I'm
going to go and select this one and then
next. Now I'm just getting an overview
of my data. So next. Now just to make
sure that you are not getting any error,
I'm going to go and allow nulls and
that's all. So next and finish. So
perfect. The data has been inserted. Now
let's go to our database tables. And as
you can see, we have here our new table.
So you have to go and repeat this three
times in order to import the data. Well,
you can use this method if the first
method didn't work. But I really
recommend you to use the script in order
to create the database. The third way is
to go and restore the database itself.
Now how we're going to do it? We're
going to go again to the data sets and
as you can see we have here a database
backup. So as you can see we have here a
PAK file. So now what you have to do is
to go and copy that and then we're going
to go to the database location. So it
really depend where you have installed
the SQL server. So currently I have it
here program files Microsoft SQL server
and then the express MSSQL backup and
you have to place the file over here. So
I have it here data warehouse analytics
backup. And now all what you have to do
is to right click on the database and
then say restore database and then we're
going to go to the device three points
and we're going to say add. And now you
can see our database data warehouse
analytics. Once we say okay and then
okay and now since I have it already I
will get an error but once I click okay
the whole database can be restored
without running any scripts. So those
are the three ways on how to create the
database of the projects and if you have
built with me the data warehouse
projects before you don't have to do it
because we have built that together. So
pause the video and get the data for the
projects. All right my friends. So we're
going to start with a secret, a little
trick that I usually do by analyzing any
data sets. So let's start with little
coffee before we start. H this is really
hot. Okay. So the secret says as I'm
looking to any data sets in any
projects, I see the data always divided
between dimensions and measures.
What truth? You take the blue pill, you
take the red pill. All I'm offering is
the truth. Nothing more.
If you see your data like me as
dimensions and measures, you can
generate like endless amount of insights
from any projects from any data sets and
you will find me through the projects
that I'm always speaking about measures
and dimensions. So I'm going to show you
how I usually do it. So now usually by
looking to any data sets in any
projects. So you have like multiple
columns and rows here I see the data
always splitted into two categories
either a dimension or a measure. And now
of course the question is here is my
column a dimension or a measure? Well in
order to assign it to one of those
categories you have to ask the first
question is it a numeric value? If it's
not so you have like string or date or
any other data type then it is a
dimension and if it is yes in numeric
then you have to ask the second question
does it make sense to aggregate it. So
if the answer for both questions is yes,
it is numeric and it makes sense to
aggregate it then it is a measure
otherwise it is a dimension. Now let's
practice and have some examples. So now
by looking to the values of the column
category you can see all the values are
characters. So it is not numeric that
means this column is a dimension. So it
is very simple. Let's take another
column. We have the sales amount. So now
as you can see the values are numeric
and as well it makes sense to aggregate
those values. we can get the total sales
or the average sales and so on. So it
fulfill both of the conditions. It is
numeric and it makes sense to aggregate
it. That's why we say sales is a
measure. Now if you're checking the
values of the product name, you can see
that all of them are characters and
names. So it is not numeric. That means
the product is a dimension. Moving on to
the next one, we have the quantity. The
values are numeric and as well it makes
sense to aggregate it. Can summarize all
those values to have the total quantity.
So quantity is a measure. Now if you're
looking to the values of the birth dates
you can see this is a date information
it is not numeric so that means it is a
dimension right but if you calculate the
age from the birth dates age of the
customer going to be in numeric and it
makes sense to aggregate it for example
finding the average age of customers. So
if we derive a numeric value from a
dimension then we can use it as a
measure. So age is measure and now we
come to something really tricky. This is
the ID. So for example if you are
checking the customer ID you can see all
those values are numeric. So the first
condition is fulfilled. Now the very
important question does it make sense to
aggregate the ids? Well those ids are
unique identifier for a customer and if
you find like the average of that it is
not like helpful right I cannot think of
one use case of aggregating the customer
ID like having the average of all those
ids or summarizing the ids. So it makes
no sense to aggregate it. That's why we
can consider the ID of a customer as a
dimension not as a measure. So as you
can see it is very simple. If it is
numeric and it makes sense to aggregate
then it is measure otherwise it is a
dimension. And this is the foundations
of any data analytics. If you see your
data as dimensions and measures you can
generate a lot of use cases and insights
from your data sets. Now I totally
understand if you are still confused
about dimensions and measures and you
might be asking why do I need measures
and dimensions. Well if you are doing
any type of data analysis or you are
exploring any data sets you will be end
up always like grouping up the data by
something like you are grouping the data
by countries or grouping the data by for
example products or categories. So we
need dimensions to group up our data and
in the other sides you will be asking
questions like how much how many what is
the total of something. So you always
need to aggregate or calculate something
right and for that you need the measure.
So we need the measures in order to
answer the question how many and how
much and we need the dimensions in order
to group up the data by something. So
that's why almost in any type of data
analyzes you need dimensions and
measures and this going to be more clear
as we progress in the projects. All
right. So now I'm going to walk you
through the project road map and I have
split that into six steps. So we're
going to do different types of
explorations like the database
dimensions, measures, dates and we're
going to do some basics analyszis like
the magnitude and the ranking. So let's
start with the first step in our
projects. We're going to do database
exploration. So let's say that you have
joined a team and you got an access to a
database. The first thing that I usually
do is that I explore the structure of
the database just to have basic
understandings about the database
tables, the views, columns. Are we
talking about like 10 tables, hundreds
of tables? So it is just a few queries
in order to say hello to the database.
So now let's go to SQL and explore the
database of our projects. So now how we
going to do it? Either you go to the
left side over here and start clicking
the objects of your database and explore
the tables, views, columns and so on. Or
a better way that I usually do it that I
explore the database using a query. So
what we can do, we can go and select
data from the system tables because the
database stores metadata informations
about our tables and objects. So we're
going to target an information schema.
This is an internal schema in the
database where we have like multiple
tables and views to explore the metadata
and the structure of our database. So
for example, we can go with the tables.
So let's go and create it. And with that
you have a list of tables and with that
you can see multiple informations like a
catalog, the schema and the table names
and you can see over here the object
type whether it is a table or a view. If
you done the data warehouse project with
me then you will find a lot of tables.
But if you are just doing the data
analyzes you will see only those three
tables. So customers, products and
sales. So with that we can see in our
database there are like around 15 tables
or three tables. Now in the output you
can see the database name the schema and
a list of all tables and of course don't
forget that you are using the database
that we created. So with that we have a
nice quick list with all tables inside
our database. Now the next step we can
go and drill down and check what are the
columns that we have inside our
database. And for that we can as well
target the same schema. So select star
from information schema and it is very
simple. So we're going to go to the
table columns. So let's go and execute
it. And now we will see a lot of
informations over here. So we can see in
our database we have around 101 columns.
So that we can see all the columns
available in our database. And what I
usually do with that I go and select the
columns only for specific table. So we
can say where are table name
equal let's get for example the
dimension customers. So let's query the
whole thing and with that we can see we
have 10 columns inside this dimension
and this is how the columns are sorted
inside our table or view and we can see
all the metadata informations about each
column. So now as you can see we are now
exploring the structure of our database
and this is really helpful to get an
overview of the database and the
projects. Are we talking about like 20
tables or hundreds of tables? And we can
quickly see the naming of the columns,
the tables. This is really important to
get a feeling about the projects and
sets the foundations for exploring the
data inside those tables. All right
friends, so with that we have done the
first step. We have explored the
database structure and now we can start
diving into the actual data. The first
thing that we can explore is the
dimensions.
Okay. So what we going to do with the
dimension exploration? All what we have
to do is to go and identify the unique
values of each dimension that we have
inside our database. This can help us to
understand what are the categories,
which countries, what are the product
types that we have inside our database
and we have a very simple formula for
that. So all what you need is the SQL
keyword distinct together with any
dimension in your data set like distinct
country, distinct category. So for
example if you are checking any column
that is dimension you can see a lot of
values and repeating stuff but now once
you say distinct column what going to
happen you will get a list of all unique
values and with that you can understand
quickly I have three different types so
I have a bc and this as well going to
help you to understand the granularity
of your dimension does the dimension has
like three values or 100 value so it is
very simple let's go and analyze our
dimensions okay so now let's explore the
dimension values inside our database so
let's start with the first table the
customers and if you check those columns
we have to find an interesting dimension
like for example the country. So now
what we can do we can go and explore all
the countries our customers come from.
So let's go and do that. It is very
simple. Select distinct and then we have
our column the dimension country from
our table customers. So let's go and
execute it. And with that we can see in
the result we have six countries. This
is really nice in order to understand
the geographical spread. So we have
customers for our business that comes
from six different countries. Germany,
United States, France, Canada and so on.
So now with that we have like the first
little insights about our business. Now
let's jump to another table the
products. So what we have to do is to
explore all the categories inside our
business the major divisions. So we're
going to say select distinct category
from our table products. So let's go and
execute it. Now in the output you can
see we have four categories. We have the
accessories, bikes, clothing and
components. This is like giving us an
overview of the product range. What are
the major divisions inside our business?
Now the next one I'm digging deeper in
this information. So not only I want to
see the categories, I would like as well
to see the
subcategories. I'm not starting a new
query because there is of course
relationship between the category and
the subcategory. Let's go now and
execute it. Now you can see in the
output our categories are now splitted
into more specific groups. So for
example the bikes over here we have
mountain bikes, road bikes and so on. So
as you can see the subcategories has
more details about the products than the
category. And now in order to get the
full picture we going to bring now the
product name. So with that we're going
to get a big picture in one shot. So now
you can see the whole hierarchy of our
products. And of course it is more
interesting if you go and sort the data
by those three informations. So let me
just execute it again. So now if you go
and explore our data for example we have
here the category accessories and we
have a subcategory inside it called
lights. And in this subcategory we have
three different products. And if you
scroll to the end of our table you can
see that we have around
295 products. So you can see the
granularity of the product name is
different than the category and the
subcategory. And all those three
informations are related to each others.
So now as you can see after exploring
those dimensions we have now better
understanding on how the data is
organized and this can help us by the
analyzes if you are aggregating by the
category you will get only four rows. If
you are aggregating by the products you
will get hundreds of rows. So this is
how we explore the dimensions of our
database. Okay. So now with that we have
a clear picture about the dimensions
inside our data sets. And now in the
next step we're going to deep dive into
one special type of dimensions. We have
the dates. So we're going to explore the
date
columns. Okay. So now what we going to
do with the date exploration? We're
going to go and explore the boundaries
of the dates that we have in the data
sets. What is the earliest and the
latest dates in my data? We're going to
understand the time span. Do we have in
our business 2 years or like 10 years?
And this is of course very important to
understand in order later to make
different types of time analyzes. Now
the formula for that is very simple. All
what we need is the min and max
functions in order to get the earliest
and the latest dates. And of course
we're going to apply that on date
columns, date dimensions. So for
example, we're going to have like min
order date, max create date, min birth
date. So any date that you have in your
data set. And here if you look to any
date column inside your data, you will
find multiple values. But what is
interesting is to understand what is the
earliest date like here for example 2018
and what is the latest date for example
2028 and with that we can understand aha
we have like time span of 10 years using
the date diff function. So now let's go
and apply our new formula on our date
columns. All right. So now let's search
for date informations inside our
database. And usually you're going to
find a lot in the facts. So let's go to
the fact cells. And here we have like
multiple dates. the order date, shipping
date and due dates. Now let's go and
explore the boundaries of the order
date. So we have the following task.
Find the date of the first and last
order. So how we going to do that? We're
going to say select and we are targeting
the order date from our table sales. So
let's go and execute it. And now we can
see we have a lot of values inside our
database. So now in order to find the
first dates, what we're going to do,
we're going to go and use the function
min in order to get the minimum order
dates. So we're going to go and call it
first order dates. So let's go and
execute it. So now we can see the date
of the first order. It is in December
2010. Now let's go and find the date of
the last order. So we're going to have
this time the max order date. Uh let's
go and call it last order date. So let's
go and explore now the other boundary
and with that we can see in January 2014
it is the date of the last order in our
system. So with that we have explored
the boundaries of the order dates the
first and the last and of course we can
now understand very quickly that we have
four years of sales inside our business
but we can go and calculate it. So now
the task says how many years of sales
are available. Now in order to find the
years between those two dates, we have
another scale function. It's called date
diff. And now we have to go and subtract
two dates. Now this function need three
arguments. The first one you have to
specify whether it is a year, month and
day. And we start with the smallest
date. So it's going to be the min order
dates. And then the last argument is
going to be the latest or the highest
date. And it's going to be the max order
dates. And we can go and call it order
range in years. Okay. So let's go and
execute it. And with that you can see in
the output we have four years. Of course
if you want to go and check the months
you can go over here and say month and
execute. So between those two dates we
have 37 months. And of course now we
have to go and rename it. So with that
we have explored the dimension order
dates. But what is more interesting is
to check the customers and here we have
the birth date. So now what we can do,
we can go and find the youngest and the
oldest customer. So let's go and do
that. We're going to say select
minates and with that we are getting the
oldest birth date and we will get now
the max birth date and with that we will
get the youngest birth date from our
table customers. So let's go and explore
that. Now we can see the birth date of
the oldest customer. I hope he or she is
still alive. So it is more than 100
years and the youngest customer is
around like 40 years. So we don't have
really young customers inside our
business. And of course if you don't
want to see the birth dates, you want to
see the age, what you have to do is
actually very simple. You're going to
use as well diff and we want the year
and then we're going to say min birth
date with the current date and time. And
for that we have a function called get a
date and we're going to call it oldest
age. So if you go ahead and execute this
one over here you can see the age of the
oldest customer it is 109. Of course you
can do the same thing for the youngest.
If you just replace this with max and
here we have the youngest age. So let's
go and execute it. It is 39. So my
friends this is how we explore the
boundaries of a date and by finding the
first date and the last date and the
years between them we are having now
more understanding of the time span of
our business and that's going to help us
later by making different type of
complex analyzers. So this is how we
explore the dates. All right. So with
that we have now a clear picture about
the scope of our projects and the date
range inside our data sets. Now in the
next step, we're going to go and explore
the second type of data, the
measures. All right. So now what is
exactly exploring the measures? What
we're going to do is to calculate and
find out the key metrics of our
business, the big numbers, the highest
level of aggregations of our data. And
the formula for that is very simple.
We're going to go and use the aggregate
functions in SQL like the sum, average,
count for any measure inside our data
sets. So for example, we're going to
find the total sales by summarizing the
sales value, finding the average price,
finding the sum of quantity in order to
have a big number about all sold items.
So always an aggregate function together
with a measure. So for example, if you
have a column where you have a lot of
values and you go and summarize all
those values, you will get for example
240. So this is a key metric. This is
the highest level of aggregations and
the value is not splitted at all. So for
example, we say this is the total
revenue of our business. And this is
exactly what we mean by exploring the
measures. We will get those big numbers.
So now let's go and apply those
aggregate functions to the measures that
we have inside our data set. Okay. So
now we're going to go and spotlight on
the big numbers that matters the most of
our business. So now based on those
three tables, I have collected here the
following questions. So let's go and
solve them one by one. The first one is
find the total sales. So we're going to
go and summarize by using the sum
function for the sales amount as total
sales from our table fact sales. So
let's go and execute it. So this is the
total amount of sales in our business.
It is around 29 millions. So this is the
business total revenue. Now we can go to
the second one. It says show how many
items are sold. So this time we need
another column but from the same table
from the fact sales. So the question is
how many items that means we want the
quantity and we're going to stay with
the same function. So we are summarizing
all the values of the quantity and we
can call it total quantity. Let's go and
explore that. So we can see our business
did sold around 60,000 items and these
60,000 items did generate around 30
million. So let's keep going. The next
question, find the average selling
price. So that means we are targeting
the same table. And here we have the
price informations. So we're going to
say the price. This time the aggregate
function going to be the average. And
we're going to call it average price. So
let's go and execute it. So the average
price in our business is 486. So that
means our business is selling like
expensive items. Now let's go to the
next question. It says find the total
number of orders. And for that we're
going to go and use the function count
and we can count the order numbers. So
order number total orders let's go and
execute it. So it says we have 60,000
orders. And now as you are working with
the count function what I usually do I
try to count the same thing but using a
distinct. So distinct order number. So,
what I'm trying to do here is first
eliminate any duplicates in the order
number and then count it. I don't want
to count the same order twice inside our
sales. So, let's go and execute that.
Now, as you can see, we have only 27,000
orders out of 60,000. So, that means the
same order is repeating in our database.
Let's have actually a look. So, select
star from our table and let's go and
have a look. Now as you can see from the
first order over here you can see the
same order is repeated three times and
that's because this customer did order
three things in the same order. So now
of course what is the definition of
order? Usually the whole thing is one
order. That's why in order to get an
accurate number of orders you have to go
and use a distinct in order to eliminate
first all duplicates and then count how
many orders we have. So in this scenario
I'm going to say in our business we have
around 27,000 orders. So that's why it
is little bit tricky using the count
function. Always try to compare the
numbers before and after using distinct.
So let's keep going to the next one. It
says find the total number of products.
So it is very simple. We're going to say
select count and we're going to say
product key as total products from the
table gold products. So let's go and
execute it. So as you can see we have
295 and if you go and make it distinct
just to check you will get the same
number. So that means there is no
duplicates and of course you can go and
count the product name instead. The
names of the product is unique. So
that's why we are as well getting the
same numbers. So that's it. Let's
continue find the total number of
customers. So the same thing select
count and you can go with a customer key
for example from called a dimension
customers and I'm going to call it as
total customers. So let's go and execute
it. So we can see in our system we have
18,000 registered customers. Now the
next one it says find the total number
of customers that has placed an order.
So that means having a customer inside
our database doesn't mean that this
customer did already placed an order.
Maybe we have customer that just
registered and didn't order anything. So
what we're going to do, we're going to
take the same query, but instead of
targeting the customers table, we're
going to target our fact the sales. So
let's go and execute it. So now, as you
can see, we are getting 16,000, which
makes no sense because one customer
might order multiple stuff. So what
we're going to do, we're going to say
distinct and let's query it again. So
now it is more correct. We are getting
around 18,000 customers. Now we can go
and compare them one by one. So as you
can see we are getting the same numbers.
So that means all our registered
customers did already placed an order
because the numbers are matching. So it
is very simple. We are just using an
aggregate functions and that we are
getting those key values. But what I
usually do is that I collect all those
measures in one query in order to have
an overview of all key numbers in our
business. So instead of me querying each
one of them individually, I combine them
in one go. So now what we're going to
do, we're going to generate a report
that shows all key metrics of our
business. So how I usually do it, I'm
going to go and get the first query for
the total sales and put it over here.
And now I'm going to build only two
columns. The first one is the name of
the measure and the second one is the
value of the measure. So let me show you
what I mean. Now this one over here, I
will not call it total sales. I'm going
to make it like generic. So I'm going to
say measure value. And before it we're
going to make another column from a
static string value is the total sales
and we're going to call it measure name
like this. So let's go and just execute
this one over here. So the measure is
total sales. So it is not anymore like
the column name. It is now a value in
the output and the measure value is like
around 30 millions. Now what I'm going
to do I'm going to go and add another
measure as a second row. And in order to
do that, we're going to use the union
all and then copy the whole thing over
here and say total quantity and we're
going to change the measure to quantity.
So now let's select both of them and
query. And now as you can see we have
now the two big numbers in one query. So
the total sales and the total quantity.
So now what we can do we can go and
collect all those big numbers and
measures and put it in one query. So
with that we have the average price, the
total number of orders, product,
customers and as well you can go and
target different tables because SQL
cares here only about the number of
columns and the data type of columns
must be matching. So now let's go and
query this and now in single query we
can see the big numbers the key metrics
of our business. We can see the total
sales, total quantity, average price and
so on. This is a super report where you
can generate it for any business where
you have in one go the full big picture
about the business. So this is how I
generally do if I'm exploring a new
database. I put all those big numbers
and measures in one query to have better
understanding about the business. All
right my friends. So with that we have
now a clear understanding about the
dimensions and as well the measures of
our data sets. Now in the next step
we're going to go and start combining
stuff together in order to generate
insights. And we're going to focus now
in a very basic analyszis. It is the
magnitude
analyzis. Okay. So now what is exactly a
magnitude analyszis? It's all about
comparing the measure values across
different categories and dimensions. And
this can help us of course to understand
the importance of different categories.
Now the formula for that going to be
interesting. So now this time we will be
mixing stuff together. So first we have
to go and aggregate a specific measure
and then we say by dimension. We need
here the dimension in order to split the
measure. It sounds complicated but it is
very simple and basics. So for example
we can say the total sales by country,
the total quantity by category, the
average price by products, the total
orders by customer and if you follow
this formula you will be generating
endless amount of insights by just
combining any measure with any
dimension. You can call it it is a new
insight. So it's going to look like like
this. If you have one measure that is
like for example 600 and if you put now
this measure together with dimension
what's going to happen this 600 is going
to be splitted by the dimension values.
So A going to have like 200, B going to
have 300 and C 100. And now with that we
can go and compare those categories
right. So we can see now that category B
has the highest measure and the C has
the lowest. And this help us to compare
the values of the measure. what is the
best category and what is the worst
category. So this is very basics
analyszis. So let's go and apply this
formula on our data sets. Okay. So now
let's go and break all our measures by
dimensions. So here I have prepared few
interesting examples where first we're
going to break the total number of
customers. As we learned we have 18,000
by the countries. So the measure is
total customers and the dimension going
to be the countries. So let's go and
write the query for that. So we're going
to select. So the first thing that we're
going to go and add is the dimension. So
it's going to be the country. And then
we need the measure. It's going to be
the count of the customer key. So this
will give us the total customers. And we
need to select our table. So it's going
to be the dimension customers. And of
course we have to go and group up the
data by the countries. So group up
country. So let's go and execute it. And
with that you see again the list of
countries. So we have our six countries
and then the total customers for each
country. So that we can see the
distribution of customers by the
country. But what we usually do is that
we go and sort the data by the measure
the total customers like this. And we're
going to sort it by descending. So with
that we will get first the countries
with the highest customers. So let's go
and execute it. So now we can see in the
results the highest number of customers
come from United States then Australia,
United Kingdom
337 customers without the country
informations it is not available. So
that's it right it is very simple. So
with that we have splitted the total
number of customers by a dimension the
country. Now of course we can go and
split the data by different type of
dimension. So for the next one we are
saying find the total customers by
gender. So here's the same thing. We
have the same measure that to other
customers but we are splitting the data
by different type of dimension. So just
copy and paste and now instead of
countries we just going to switch it to
gender and over here and that's it. So
let's go and execute. So now as you can
see the granularity of the gender over
here is different than the countries. We
have here only three values and we can
see it is almost splitted evenly between
male customers and female customers. And
of course this going to help us to
understand the demography of our
customers. And as you can see it was
very simple. We just switch the
dimension. So you can go and split as
well by the marital status and so on.
Now let's go and split the total
products by the category. Well actually
the query is going to be very simple as
well. So select and here we're going to
have the same aggregate function the
count products key as total
products from our table gold dimension
products and then we're going to group
up by the dimension the category and
we're going to order by as well the same
thing total products distinct from the
highest to the lowest. So let's go and
execute it. And with that we can see how
many products do we have in each of
those categories. And we can see the
biggest category the components and
after that the pikes. And this is
interesting that we have seven products
where we have nulls where they don't
belong to any category. This is really
nice. Let's go to the next one. What do
we have over here? What is the average
costs in each category? So this is like
different style of question but at the
ends we're going to have the same thing.
We have over here the average costs.
This is the measure and the category is
our dimension. It's like we are saying
find average costs by category. So what
we're going to do, we're going to go and
copy the same query and the dimension is
the same. So the categories but the
measure is different. We are not talking
about the total products. We are going
to say average and here we're going to
have the column costs and let's go and
rename it average costs. So that's it as
well for the order by we have to use the
new measure. So let's go and execute it.
So now we can see the most expensive
category is the bikes costs a lot
compared to the accessories of course.
So you can see the accessories is only
13 and the bikes is 900. So this is as
well gives us insights about how
expensive each category is and as you
can see it is always the same templates.
We are splitting specific measure by a
dimension. So let's keep going to the
next one. It says what is the total
revenue generated for each category. So
again here the question is find the
total revenue by category. So the total
revenue here is the measure and the
category again is the dimension. So now
the total revenue comes from the fact
and the category comes this time from
the dimension. So that means we have to
go and join tables right. So how we
going to do it? Let's go and start with
the select star from and I would like
always to start from the fact table. So
fact sales f and then we're going to go
and join it with the dimension and
usually I go with the left join in order
to not lose anything because if you use
an inner join you might lose in the fact
few orders and few sales I don't want
that. So lift join with the dimension
this one going to be the products and
the key for that going to be very simple
going to be the product key and the same
thing for the facts. So with that we
join the fact table with the dimension.
So now we have to go and pick what do we
need? We need from the fact the sales
right. So sales amount and we need from
the products the category and we want to
group up the data by the category. So so
this part is done. What is missing is of
course the aggregations. So we are
aggregating actually the sales. So sum
sales and we can call it total revenue.
So like this. And of course we can go
and order the data by the total revenue
by our measure and distinct from highest
to the lowest. So as you can see it is
exactly like the previous one. But here
the data doesn't come from only one
table. Here it comes from two tables. So
the measure come from the facts and the
dimension come from the dimension
products. And this is classic right? The
dimension has all those descriptions and
details about the products like the
categories. And the fact table has all
those measures and dates that we use in
order to calculate our measures. So
that's it. Let's go and execute it. Now,
as you can see in the output, the
category bikes is bringing the most of
revenue. So here it's like in millions
28 millions of sales and the accessories
and the closing is not really bringing a
lot of like revenue. Both of them are
below like 1 million. So with that you
can understand our business is making a
lot of money selling bikes, right? So my
friends as we are exploring the data we
are understanding more and more about
our business right so let's keep going
to the next one we have here the
question what is the total revenue
generated by each customer so now we
want to find out the top spender right
select star and as well we start from
the fact table and this time we're going
to lift join it with the customers right
so the dimension customers and we're
going to go join the data so we're going
to use the customer key for the join And
what we're going to do, we're going to
go and get maybe the customer key. And
let's go and get as well the first name,
maybe few details about the customer and
as well the last name. So those are the
columns that we want from the customers.
And now what do we need? We need the
aggregation. So it's going to be the
same thing. Sales amount as total
revenue. And we have to go and group up
the data by all those three
informations. So we're going to go and
copy paste. And at the end as usual,
we're going to order by the measure
total revenue descending. So that's it.
It is exactly like previous one but with
different dimensions. So let's go and
query it. And now we get a full list of
all our customers, the 18,000s. And we
can see the total revenue for each
customer. So we can see Nicole and
Caitlyn, they are our top spenders and
the most royal customers that generated
sales and revenue for our business. This
is really cool. Right now let's go to
the next one. It says what is the
distribution of sold items across
countries. It is like finding the total
quantity by countries. So it is very
simple. I'm going to go and take the
same query because countries comes from
the dimension customers and the sold
items the quantity come from the sales.
So we are doing the same joints but with
different dimensions and measures. So
what do we need from the customers is
only the country and the measure going
to be the quantity. And here we're going
to go and say total sold items and we
have to change the group by to the
countries and sorting the data by the
new measure. That's it. And with that we
are generating new reports by just
changing the dimensions and measures. So
again this is very interesting to
understand which country is generating
like good business for us. So my friends
as you might already noticed if in the
dimension we have like small number of
unique values like in the countries we
have here only seven values in the
gender we have only three we call those
dimensions low cardality dimensions
because we have low number of values
inside it and in the result we will get
only here for example seven rows but if
our dimension is high cardality like by
the customers we have 18,000 unique
customers then our measure going to be
splitted by those 18,000 and in the
results we will get exactly the same
number of customers. So the number of
rows and results really depends on the
cardality of the dimension. So as you
can see we can generate a lot of
different reports by only following this
formula dividing the measure by a
dimension. So we just generated eight
different insights and reports by only
few measures and dimensions. So now what
you can do you can pause the video and
try different dimensions and measures in
order to have more insights about our
business. Okay. So as you can see this
is the basics analyszis that we can do
in any data set or any domain where we
are aggregating a measure by dimension.
Now in the next and last step in our
projects we will be doing ranking
analyszis. Okay. So what is ranking
analyszis? It is very basic. We're going
to go and order the value of our
dimension based on a measure in order to
identify the top performers and as well
the bottom performers. And the formula
for that is going to be the following.
So this time we're going to be ranking
the dimensions by an aggregated measure.
So for example, we're going to rank the
countries by the total sale or we're
going to find the top five products by
the sold item, the quantity or the
bottom three customers by total orders.
So it's like the magnitude analyzes.
We're going to have like an ordered list
of dimensions value. For example, from
the highest to the lowest in order to
identify quickly the top performers. And
of course we can go and filter the data
by saying I would like to have only the
top two categories. And with that you
are removing all other dimensions that
are not on the top two. And in SQL we
can use for that the keyword top or we
can use the ranking window functions
like rank, dense rank, row number and so
on. So let's go and apply our formula in
order to rank our data set. Okay. So now
let's check our data. We're going to
start with the first question. Which
five products generate the highest
revenue? So we are searching for the
best performing products in our
business. So of course the first
question what is the dimension and
measure that we have in this question.
Well the revenue that means we need the
sales from the facts and the products
that means we need the dimension
products. Now in order to write this
query it's going to be very simple. So
we can use as well the group by I will
not write it from the scratch. So I'm
just going to take this query over here
where we aggregated the total sales by
the category. Now what I have to do is
just to change the dimension. So instead
of the category we need the product name
and we are aggregating now the data by
the product name because we need the top
five products right. So the revenue is
the sales amount and with that we have
like almost everything is ready. So
let's go and execute it. And now we can
see we have a list of all products in
our business and as well we can see the
total revenue. But the task says here we
need the top five. So we don't need all
the products from our database. We have
to go and select only this subset. Now
in order to do that in SQL server, it's
very simple. We're going to go over here
and say top five and SQL going to go and
return only the first five rows from the
results. So let's go and execute it. And
as you can see now in the results, we
have only five products with the highest
sales. And that's it. With that, we have
solved the task and we can see the top
five products and all of them are pikes.
Now let's go and check the other sides.
We want to find the five worst
performing products by the same measure,
the sales. And this is very simple. So
what we're going to do, we're going to
go and take the same query over here.
And now what we're going to do, we're
going to go and sort the data from the
lowest to the highest. So instead of
descending, we're going to remove it.
And with that, SQL going to use the
ascending. So let's go and execute it.
And with that, as you can see, we are
getting the worst five performing
products by just sorting the data
differently. So it is very simple right
and with that we can see our five best
sellers and the five worst sellers. And
now what we can do we can go and just
change the dimension and generate
different reports like instead of the
product name let's go and check the
subcategories what are the best
subcategories of our data. So I just
change the dimension let's go and query.
So with that we can see the best
subcategories we have in our business
and the same thing if you want to go and
check the worst performing
subcategories. So generating reports is
very simple and now my friends in SQL
there is like two ways on how to create
ranking. We have a simple one where we
are using the group by clouds together
with the keyword top. But if you are
generating a reports where it's things
are more complex and you need more
flexibility, you should use the window
functions. So let me show you how I can
solve this task using the window
function. So now I'm going to go and
take almost the same query. Let's put it
over here. I'm going to get rid of the
top five. And let's see, we are still
speaking about the products name as well
with a group I. But now what we're going
to do, we're going to go and generate a
rank. So we can go and use for example
the row number. And in scale there's
like different types of window functions
for ranking. One of them is the row
number or the rank and then we're going
to say over. Now we're going to go and
sort the data. It's like we have done in
the previous one. We have to sort the
data by the total revenue and the total
revenue is the sum of sales and
descending and we're going to call this
rank products. So let's go and execute
it. Now as you can see we have created a
new column where we have like a rank. So
we have for each products like one rank
until the last
products 130. So now what we are
interested is to go and select the top
five. Right now in order to do that we
need a second step. That's why we're
going to go and use the subquery. So
we're going to say select star from and
then we're going to put the whole thing
in a subquery something like that. And
all what you have to do is to use the
new flag that we have created in order
to filter the data. So we're going to
say where the rank products is smaller
or equal to five. And with that we
should get only the top five products.
So let's go and execute it. And as you
can see we are getting the same results.
Now, of course, with the window
function, it is more complicated than
the first one. But with the window
function, we get more flexibility on
selecting more columns or adding more
different types of aggregations and
details on the query. And as well, we
can go and use different types of
ranking functions that handles the tice
differently. So, if the task is very
simple like this, I'm going to go with
the simple group pie. But if you are
generating like complex reports, I'm
going to go with the window function. So
now what you can do, you can go and rank
the data by different dimensions and
measures. For example, find the top 10
customers who have generated the highest
revenue. And as well, you can go and
find the three customers with the fewest
orders placed. So again, we can go and
reuse the previous queries that we have
generated. So this query generates the
customers and their total sales. And all
what you have to do is to say top 10 and
then rerun the query. And with that, we
are getting the top 10 customers. and
about the lowest three customers. All
what we have to do is to go and replace
the measure. So we are counting the
unique number of orders. So we're going
to say total orders and as well go
change the order by not descending
ascending. And we need the top three. So
let's go and execute it. So we can see
the three customers that did order only
once and they are the three customers
with the fewest orders. So as you can
see by just switching the dimensions and
measures we are generating completely
new important insights and as you can
see as we are exploring the data we are
understanding what are the best products
what are the top customers that are
usually very important for reporting.
All right my friends so with that we
have covered the last step in our
projects how to rank our data and with
that we have covered all the steps of
the project road map. We have done a lot
of explorations for the database,
dimensions, measures. We have combined
the dimensions and measures in order to
do magnitude and ranking analyszis.
Okay, my friends. So that's all about
the EDA projects. And now in the next
one, we will do the last type of
projects, the advanced data analytics.
So let's
go. And now the type that we're going to
cover is advanced analytics projects
using SQL where we're going to write
complex SQL queries to answer real
business questions. So we're going to
use the advanced window functions, the
CTE subqueries and we're going to go and
script two big queries in order to
generate two reports. So with this type
of project, you will learn how to solve
real business questions using advanced
techniques. All right. So for this
project as well, we have a road map
where we're going to progress through
different type of steps and analyzes. So
we're going to do many stuff like change
over time, cumulative analyszis,
performance, data segmentations and at
the end reporting and all using SQL. So
let's start with the first step in the
road map. We going to analyze the change
over time. So let's
go. Okay. So now what is change over
time? It is a technique in order to
analyze how a measure evolves over the
time. And this is very important in
order to track the trends and as well to
identify seasonality of your data. And
the formula for that is very simple.
We're going to go and aggregate a
measure but this time based on a date
dimension. For example, the total sales
by a year, the average cost by the
month. So if you combine any aggregated
measure together with a date column or
dimension, then all what you are doing
is you are analyzing the change over
time. So for example, we're going to go
and break our measure this time for
example by the years. And with that we
can track immediately how our business
is doing over the time over the years.
So for example, we can see here the best
year was 2024 and then we have really
hard decline in our business in 2025 and
then slightly it's going up in 2026. So
with that we can quickly analyze the
trends of our business. So now let's go
and check the trends and the changes
over time in our business. Okay. So now
let's analyze the trends and changes
over time in our data and in order to do
this kind of analyzes usually we target
the fact table because there usually we
have our measures and as well dates. So
we have the order date, shipping date
and due date. Now what we can do we can
go and analyze there the sales
performance over time. So as we learned
all what we need is a metric and a date.
Let's go for example and select the
order date and as well one of those
measures sales amount from our fact
table. So let's go and query it. And we
can go and order the data by the order
dates ascending. So let's go and
execute. And as you can see we have
nulls in our data. What we can do? We
can go and filter those data out. We
don't need it. So we're going to say
where order date is not null. So let's
go and execute it again. All right. So
that we don't have those orders. Now, as
you can see, we have sales over time,
right? We have a date and we have a
measure. So this looks really good. But
now what we're going to do, we're going
to go and aggregate the data by the
sales amount. So let's go and say sum.
And we're going to call it total sales.
And then we group up the data by the
order dates. So let's go and execute it.
And with that, as you can see, for each
day, we have the total sales. So now the
granularity of our data is the day and
we can say of course now we are
analyzing the sales over time but
usually we don't aggregate the data on
the day level we want to have higher
aggregations for example let's go to the
years and now in order to change the
dimension date here from a day to a year
we have to use date functions and there
are a lot of date functions in order to
extract that date part and now in order
just to get the year we have a quick
function called year and it going to
convert convert our date to year. So
let's call it order year and of course
we have to go and group up the data by
the year and as well sort it by the
year. So let's go and execute. Now we
are at the year level and we have only
five years. So that means we have
changed the aggregation from the day to
year and now it is very easily to
analyze the performance of our business
over the years. So the first year was
the lowest and you can see 2013 is the
best year in our business and then it is
declined massively in 2014. And of
course we can go and add more measures
to our data not only the total sales.
For example, let's go and calculate the
total number of customers. So we can say
count distinct customer key as total
customers. So let's go and execute it.
And with that we can check are we
gaining like customers over the time if
there are any trends that we can see and
we can go and keep extending stuff like
we can go and add the total number of
quantities. So summarize quantity as
total quantity. So let's go and execute
and with that we have really nice
picture in order to understand is the
revenue increasing or decreasing over
the time what is the best year the worst
year are we gaining customers over time
if there any like trends that we can
spot now by looking to the result you
can see this gives us highlevel
long-term view of your data and of
course it helps for strategic decisions
and now what we can do we can go and
drill down to the months so we can go
and aggregate the data by the month
regardless list the years in order to
give us an idea how each month is
performing on average. So all what we
have to do is to switch the function
from year to a month like this. And of
course for the group by and the order by
let's go and execute and of course in
the output we will get all the months
and guess what which month is the best
for sales is of course December because
you have all those Christmas and stuff
and the worst months as you can see is
February. So with that we are
understanding the seasonality of our
business and the trends patterns of our
business. And as you are not including
the year in our analyzes you are
aggregating all the data from all years.
Now what we can do we can make it more
specific for each year where you go and
add the year informations to our query.
So we can have both a year and months.
Let me just change this to a month. And
of course we have to go and add it to
the group by and the order by. So let's
go and execute and with that we are
aggregating the data of a month of
specific year. So now we have all the
months of all years and now if you want
to focus on only one year what you can
do you can go and filter the data by the
order year and with that you can see how
the data is evolving over time. Now of
course in SQL we can go and format the
date differently. So instead of using
the year and the month in separate
columns what we can do we can use the
date trunk function. So instead of here
we're going to say date trunk and if you
want the granularity of your date at the
month level we're going to say month and
then the date and with that you will get
both the year and the date and let's
call it order date like this. So let's
go and execute. Now in the output we
will get exactly the same result as
before but instead of having like two
columns for the year and the month we
have everything in one and because we
saved the month that means it's still
going to go and remove all the days. So
as you can see it always starts with the
one. So the first day of the month and
with that you will get one row for each
month for each year. And if you want to
change that quickly to a year just you
go and change the date parts to a year
and you will get the granularity of the
year. Now if you don't like this format
and you would like to have your specific
format what you can do you can go and
use the format function. So format the
first argument is going to be the date
and then you go and do your format that
you want. So for example it start with
the years and let's say I would like to
have the abbreviation of the month name.
So something like this and of course
group by and order by. So let's go and
execute it. And with that we got our
format the year minus then the
abbreviation of the month. But you have
to be careful which function you are
using because the format you will get in
the output a string. And as you can see
you cannot sort it correctly. So the
data here is sorted by the year but not
by the month. But if you are using date
trunk you can see the data is correctly
sorted. So if we switch it to a month it
will be as well. Okay. So everything is
sorted correctly because the output here
is a date and SQL going to sort the date
correctly. It is not string. And if you
are using the year and the month the
output here going to be an integer and
sorting an integer is not a problem. So
of course you can go and pick the one
that you like. So that's it. Let's go
and execute it. And now you can go and
keep analyzing by finding another date
in our data set and another measure. So
as you can see it is very simple. Okay.
So that's all about how to analyze the
trends and the change over time. Now in
the next step we're going to do some
kind of advanced aggregations by doing
cumulative
analyszis. Okay. So what is cumulative
analyszis? It is aggregating the data
progressively over the time and this is
very important technique in order to
understand how our business is growing
over the time. So how our business is
progressing over the time whether it is
growing or declining it is very
interesting analyszis. So the formula
going to be very similar to the changes
over time but instead of having a simple
aggregations on the measure we're going
to aggregate our measure but this time
cumulative. So we are like adding stuff
on top of each others and the data again
can split it by the date dimension cuz
we want to track the progress over the
time. For example, we can find the
running total of sales or the moving
average of sales by a month. So now
let's have again our simple example
where our sales is splitted by the
years. Now this is the classic change
over time. But in order now to make it
cumulative what can happen? We're going
to take the measure and add to it. For
example, 2024 we have 300. And now for
2025, we're going to add the 300
together with the 100 in order to make
it cumulative. So for 2025, we're going
to have 400. And the same thing for
2026, we're going to go and add the 400
together with the 200. And with that, we
will get 600. So as you can see, we are
keep adding the values in order to
generate something called cumulative
value. Now for this type of analysis, we
use in SQL the aggregate window
functions. in order to find out the
cumulative values. So now let's go and
apply our formula in order to find
whether our business is growing or
declining. So let's go. Okay, so now we
have to analyze the following. We're
going to calculate the total sales for
each month and as well the running total
of sales over time in order to analyze
the trends. So let's see how we're going
to do that. Let's start with the easy
stuff where we're going to calculate the
total sales for each month. So we are
calculating the changes over time and we
have already done that. So all what we
need is a date and a measure. Our date
going to be the order date and the
measure going to be the sales amount
from our fact
table. So let's query this. And now we
want to find the total sales for each
month. That means we're going to change
the granularity of the order date from a
day to a month. And I usually like using
the date rank for this kind of tasks.
And the granularity going to be the
month. So this is the order
dates. And now for the sales we're going
to use aggregate function sum sales as
total sales. And of course we have to go
and group up the data by the
date. So let's go and execute it. So as
you can see we have now the total sales
for each month. And don't forget to get
rid of the nulls. So where we can say
where order date is not null. Now it
looks better. We don't have nulls. And
of course we can go and order the data
by our date. Now our measure is just
aggregated for each month individually.
Right? But we don't want that. We want
to have like a running total. So we'd
like to have like commumulative metric.
In order to do that, we have to use
window function. So let's go and do
that. We will use a subquery for that.
In order just to make it simple. So what
we need? We need the order date and
let's say the total sales and here we
have to have our window
function. Then we're going to put the
rest in a subquery. And of course we can
go and get rid of the order by because
anyway our data going to be sorted using
the window function. So now let's start
writing our window function. We will
have the sum of total sales. So we want
to summarize those new values. And we're
going to build a window function like
this over. We don't have to go and
partition anything. So we can go
immediately and say order by our new
order date that we have calculated. And
we want it to be ascending. So actually
that's it. So as running total sales. So
let's try that out. Now if you look to
the result you can see that all those
values are cumulative and it is working
like this. The first total sales is
equal to the total sales because
previously we don't have anything. Now
for the next row what going to happen is
going to go and add this value to the
previous one. And with that we get the
running total value. Now moving on to
the third row is going to go and add all
those three values together. And of
course this going to give us the running
total for this month and so on. So as
SQL is moving through the window it is
always adding the current value to all
previous values. And this is because of
the default frame of the window. The
frame going to be between the unbounded
preceding and the current row. So that
means for example if we are at this row
over here current total sales for this
month is this one and the unbounded
preceding is all the values before this
month. So that means we are getting all
the previous values together with the
current value and with that we will get
the effect of the running total sales.
And now of course as you can see it is
going through all the years. Right now
we can go and limit the running total
for only one year. So for each new year
it has to reset and start from the
scratch. So that means we are
partitioning the data. For each year we
would like to have partition. For the
first year, it's going to be 2010. It is
one row. And for the 2011, we're going
to get the whole partition over here.
So, in order to partition our window,
it's very simple. We're going to go and
say partition by the order date. That's
it. Let's go and execute it. Now, let's
go and check for the first partition for
2010. You can see the running total is
the same as the first month. But since
we have only one month, that's it for
this year. Now, as we go to the next
year, as you can see, it resets. So you
can see the running total sales for
2011. It is exactly as January. It is
not adding up now the value of the
current value with the previous one
because the previous one is outside of
the window. So as you can see we are
getting running total for the whole year
and once we hit a new year it is going
to reset. So it is working and this is
how you can create cumulative values in
SQL. And of course if you would like to
change the granularity of our data it is
very simple. All what you have to do is
to go over here and say instead of month
we're going to make it as a year. And of
course don't forget to change as well
the group by. So let's go ahead and
execute. And with that we are creating
cumulative values for each year. But of
course it makes no sense to partition by
the years. Let's go and remove it and
execute it again. And with that you are
creating the running total sales the
cumulative metric over the years. So as
you can see it is very simple. Now we
can go and add like another measure and
another aggregation like for example
instead of finding the running total we
can find the moving average. So let's
for example go and get the moving
average of the price. So first we have
to calculate the average of the price as
average price. And now what we have to
do is to go and make another window
function over here where we are saying
average the average price and we're
going to go and call it moving
average. That's it. So let's go and
execute it. And with that you are
getting the moving average price of our
sales. All right. So now you might still
asking what is really different between
using a normal aggregation and
cumulative aggregation. Well, we usually
use normal aggregations in order to
check the performance of each individual
row. Like if I want to see how each year
is performing, I'm going to go and do a
normal aggregation. But if you want to
see a progression and you want to
understand how your business is growing,
you have to go and use cumulative
aggregations because you can see easily
here the progress of your business over
the years. So there is like a difference
between using cumulative value and
normal aggregation. All right. So with
that you have done with the cumulative
analyszis and you have learned all
different types of aggregations. Now the
next step in our road map we're going to
do performance
analyszis. Okay. So what is performance
analyszis? It is the process of
comparing the current value with a
target value to compare the performance
of specific category and this can help
us in order to measure the success to
compare the performance. So the formula
for that is very simple. We're going to
find the difference between the current
measure and the target measure by
subtracting them. Like for example, we
can go and compare the current sale with
the average sale or the current year
sales with the previous year sales or
the current sales with the lowest sales
or maybe the highest sales. So as you
can see we are always comparing the
current measure together with a target
with something else. So for example, we
have here again a measure that is
splitted by three categories. So those
values are the current values. Now if
you have a target like for example the
average. Now as you can see for each row
we have like the 200. Now what we can do
once we have those two things in one row
we can go and simply subtract them. So
for the A the current value is exactly
equal to the average. Both of them is
200 and the difference between them is
zero. So this product is performing as
an average. Now for the next one we have
300 and the target is 200. So the
differences between them is 100. That
means this category is performing very
well. So this is a good performer. Now
for the last one we will get minus 100.
So that means it is below the average.
So it is not performing very well. And
for this type of analysis we usually use
window functions like the aggregate
window functions, the sum, average, max,
min or the value window functions like
lead and lag. So now let's go back to
SQL and apply this formula in order to
measure the performance of our business.
So let's go. All right my friends. So
now we have the following task. analyze
the yearly performance of products by
comparing their sales to both the
average sales performance of the
products and the previous year sales.
Okay, this sounds a little bit
complicated and serious. Let's have some
coffee before we
start. Okay, so what do we have over
here? So it is talking about the yearly
performance of products. So that means
we need the order date as a dimension
and as well the product and the measure
that is used over here is the sales. So
let's do it step by step. So we need
things from our fact table. So fact
sales and we need the product. So I'm
going to go and get it from the
dimension product in order to have a
nice name. So we have to join the data
by the product key and I'm going to go
and change the alias to P. So product
key. Okay. So with that we have our two
tables. Now let's go and select our
columns. So we need the order date. We
need the product name and we need our
measure. So it's going to be the sales
amount. All right. So now let's go and
query those informations. Now we have to
analyze the yearly performance. That
means we don't need the day. The
granularity is the years. So that's why
let's go and convert it using year
function. And we're going to call it
order year. And of course we have to go
and aggregate then the sales. And I'm
going to call it current sales. And of
course we have to group up the data by
the date, the year and as well by the
product name. So that's it. Let's go and
execute it. And of course I'm going to
go and get rid of all those nulls. So
where order date is not null. All right.
So with that we have solved the first
part. So we have the yearly performance
of the product. Now in the task we have
to compare this value the current sales
to the average sales performance of the
products. So that means we need the
average and as well the previous year
sales. So that means we have to compare
each value to the previous year for the
same product of course. So that means
things are getting a little bit more
complicated and with that we need the
help of the window functions. Let's do
it one by one. Let's focus on the
average sales. So now what we're going
to do based on those values based on
this results we will do a new
calculations and aggregations. And now
in order to do that either we use a
subquery or a city. I'm going to go with
a city because it looks nicer. So with
yearly product sales this is the new
name that we are giving for this
results. And now what we're going to do
we're going to build queries on top of
these results. So first of all I will
just select everything from this table.
yearly product sales just to test. So it
is working. Now I'm selecting data from
our city. So now the next step I'm going
to go and list all the columns that I
want in my results. So the order date,
the product
name, the current sales. This is just
nicer in order to have control on which
columns you want to present at the end
results. Now the next step, I'm going to
go and order the data by first the
product
name and then the order year. And with
that we can have better understanding of
the results. So we can see this product
has three years of sales and those are
the current sales for each year. So now
we have to go and calculate the average
of those three sales. So in order to do
that we're going to use the
average current sales over we have to
decide now how to partition the data.
Since we are focusing on the products we
have to partition the results by the
product name. So we're going to say
partition
by product name and we don't have to
sort the data because we are using the
average. So it doesn't matter how the
data is sorted. So let's call it average
sales. So let's go ahead and execute it.
And now if you are looking to the
results for this product the average
sales of all those three values is
13,000. So now as you can see for each
row we have the current sales and side
by side with the average sales and the
same thing for the next product as well.
So now since we have both of the
informations on the same row current
sales and the average the change the
difference between the current value and
the average value. So all what we have
to do is to go and subtract right. So
we're going to say the current sales
subtracted by the average sales and
we're going to call
it the difference in average. So let's
go and execute it. And now as you can
see we are getting now the comparison.
we have the differences between the
current and the average and of course
what I like to do is to make a flag or
like indicator whether we are above the
average below the average or at the
average so in order to do that we're
going to go and use the case when
statement so if the difference is higher
than zero then we are above the average
right above average oh let's have an
abbreviation for that and if we are
below zero that means we are below the
average right so below
then below average and if it is exactly
zero else then it is average. So that's
it. Let's end it and I'm going to call
it average change. So let's go and
execute it. Now if you focus again on
one of the products you can see the
current sales of this product in 2012 it
is below the average. It is really low.
And for the next year for 2013 it is
above the average. It was really nice
year for these products and the last
year 2014 it was again below the
average. So with that we have really
nice flag in order to see quickly
whether we are above or below the
average and it is interesting to see
whether we have zeros. So yeah sometimes
it is exactly like the average and here
we have like a zero. It's not below or
above. So with that we are comparing the
performance of the sales of each
products with the average. And as you
can see it is really simple. Yeah. using
the window functions. So let's go and
check again our task. We have compared
the current sales to the average sales
performance. Now we have to compare it
as well with the previous year sales. So
let's go back to our example over here.
This time we have to compare the current
sales not with the average but with the
previous year. So we don't have to write
like another CTE or query. We can
continue with the same results. So now
all what you have to do is to access the
previous year. And in order to do that,
we have amazing window function called
lag. So let's do it step by step. So now
we're going to go and create a new
column that's called lag. I want to
access the previous value of what the
current sales, right? So current sales
and
over we still have to partition the data
by the product name because we focus on
the products. So partition by product
name. But now in order to access the
previous value that means we have to
sort the data and we're going to sort it
by the years. We need the previous year.
So we're going to say order by order
year and we're going to sort it
ascending from the lowest to the
highest. So we're going to leave it like
this. And with that this window function
going to give us the previous year sales
of the products. So I'm just going to
call it previous year sales like this.
And I think here we have something
wrong. Okay. So let's go a and execute
it and let's go and focus on one of
those products. So now for the first
year of this product, the previous year
was null, right? So we don't have any
data from the previous year. But for the
2013, we have a previous year of 2012.
So that's why now we are getting the
previous value of the sales based on the
years. And the same thing for the last
year over here. You can see we are
getting the previous sales. So it is
working. And for the next window, same
thing for the first year. we will get
null and the previous sales we will get
it from the previous year. So with that
we have now the previous sales and if
you check this over here we have in the
same row now the current sales of the
current year and as well the sales of
the previous year. Now what we have to
do the same thing we have to go and
subtract those two informations in order
to compare them. Right? So we're going
to go and do the same thing. So we will
get the current sales minus the whole
thing the whole window function and
we're going to call it previous year. So
difference of the previous year and with
that we are calculating the differences
between them. So for this year for this
product as you can see the difference
here is really big between the current
sales and the previous year. Now of
course what we can do we can go and make
as well a flag or an indicator. I'm
going to go and copy the whole thing
from the previous average but we have to
go and get the right function this and
the same over here and now it is not
above or below the average I'm going to
say it is increasing or decreasing right
so increase or decrease and we're going
to call it previous year change and
instead of average we can say no change
so let's go and execute it and I'm
having here an extra comma let's go and
execute it so again let's go and focus
of one of those products. For the first
year of this product, there is no change
because there is no previous year. For
the next year of this product, we have
an increase, right? Because the current
sales is way higher than the previous
year. And now by going to the last year
of this product, we have a decrease
because the current sales is less than
the previous year. So my friends, we
call this type of analyszis year over
year analyszis. And if you want to
calculate the month over month analyzes,
it's very simple. All what you have to
do is to go and change the function from
year to a month and with that you are
extracting the month part. And the
difference between analyzing the months
and years is of course the scope.
Year-over-year is good for long-term
trends analyzes where on the other hand
the month over month it is shortterm
trends analyzes. You are just focusing
on the seasonality of your data. So this
is how we analyze the performance of our
business by comparing the current
measure with a target measure and you
can go and use different dimensions and
stuff. So instead of the sales you can
check the quantity instead of products
you can check the customers and you can
go and compare the current information
not only with the average or the
previous year you can compare it with
the lowest sales and the highest sales
and it can open the door for many
different insights. But we are always
using the same methods using the window
functions. We compare the current value
with another value in our data sets. So
this is how we do performance
comparison. All right. So that you have
learned how to analyze the performance
of our business. Now in the next step
we're going to do partto-hole analyszis.
So let's
go. Okay. So now what is exactly part to
whole analyszis? Well, we use it in
order to find out the proportion of a
part relative to the whole. Well, here
we're going to analyze how an individual
category is contributing to the overall
in order to understand what is the most
impacting category to the overall
business. So now for the formula, it is
very simple. You have to go and pick one
of your measures divided by the total of
the measure and then multiply it by 100
in order to find the percentage by a
specific dimension. Like for example, if
you take the sales, so you divide the
sales by the total sales, multiplied by
100 by the category or if you take the
quantity divided by the total quantity
and then find the percentage by a
country. So for example, again we have
our measure splitted by categories. But
now instead of having this number, what
we're going to do, we're going to
calculate the percentage. So for the
first one, we're going to take the 200
divided by 600 multiply it by 100. So
we're going to get the percentage 33. So
once we do that for the all categories,
it's going to be now very easy to see
that the category P it is contributing
to the overall number by 50%. Which
makes it of course a top performer. So
you can visual in your head as like a
pie chart and you can see how each part
is contributing to the whole pie chart
and with that it can help us to
understand the importance of each
category to our business. So now let's
go and apply this formula to our
measures in order to understand the
importance of our categories. So let's
go. Okay. So now let's do part hole
analyszis. All what we need one
dimension and one measure. So for
example we have the following task. It
is very simple. Which categories
contribute the most to the overall
sales. So now let's go and do it step by
step. So first we're going to go and
collect the informations. So we need the
category. We need the sales amount and
those informations come as usual from
the fact sales and from our dimension
the product. Right? So we have quickly
to go and connect them using the product
key. Okay. So that's all what we need
for our query. So let's go and select.
So we have here the categories and the
sales amount. So now the first thing we
have to calculate the total sales for
each category. So let's go and do that.
It is very simple. So sum total sales
and we are grouping up the data by the
category. So this is basics. Right now
we have the total sales for each of
those categories. Now in order to
calculate the percentage we need two
measures the total sales for each
category and we have it here already and
as well side by side we need the total
sales across all categories. So the big
number without any dimension but now as
you look to the result you can see the
granularity here is that category. Now
we need the total sales again by
different granularity. And in order to
mix those stuff together we use the
window functions. So now how we going to
do it? either you go over here and start
writing your window function. And of
course, you can do it together with the
group by or you can do it as a second
step in your query using either a CTE or
a subquery. So I'm going to go with the
CTE just to make it clear. So category
sales like this. So now let's start
again selecting the same information. So
category total sales from our table
category or CTE sales. So let's go and
execute it. So now we have the same
results and now we're going to go and
build our window function like this. So
we're going to say the sum we want to
aggregate all those values right to get
the total sales over the whole data
sets. So we're going to say sum total
sales. And now in order to get the big
number we're going to say over and
inside it we will not define anything
because we don't want to partition the
data. We don't want to introduce any
dimension. We just want the big number.
And with that we will get the overall
sales. So let's go and execute it. Now
as you can see this is the total sales
by the category. So the total sales is
splitted by the categories. And this is
the overall sales of all orders of
everything the highest number. Now since
we have them side by side what we can do
we can very easily calculate the path to
whole or the percentage. So let's start
doing that. We need the total sales and
we want to go and divide it by the
overall sales. So we're going to take
our window function and put it over
here. So let's go and multiply it now
with 100. I'm going to go and call it
percentage of total. So let's go and
execute it. Now as you can see we are
getting zeros and that's because the
total sales is not float. So what we
have to do is to go and cast it to
something like a decimal. So floats like
this. So let's go and reexecute it. And
now, as you can see, we are getting now
the percentages, but we have a lot of
numbers after the comma. So, we're going
to go and round the numbers now. So,
let's go to the start round and then go
to the end, comma, and let's have like
two decimals. So, let's go and execute
it again. Now, looks perfect. Now, what
we can do, we can go and add like a
percentage. And with that, we are
converting the whole thing to a string.
So, we're going to do concatenation. So,
concat at the start and go to the end.
And let's add the percentage character.
And as well we can go and order the data
by the total sales descending. So let's
go and execute it. So now by looking to
the result you can see the category
bikes is dominating. So it is
overwhelming top performing the
categories. It is making 69% of the
total sales of our business. So this
means my friends most of the business
revenue comes from the bikes. And as you
can see the accessories and clothing
they are really minor contributors to
our business which is not really good
and this is actually dangerous thing. If
you have like one category dominating
your whole business you are over relying
on only one category in your business
and if this fails this category then the
whole business is going to fail. So by
looking to this either the business has
to decide removing all those products by
those two categories or to focus more on
bringing more revenue for the products
that are inside those two categories. So
as you can see guys those insights are
really amazing for the business and
helps the managers and the decision
makers to understand what is going on
quickly and make very critical
decisions. And now you can see as well
from the results perfectly why the part
to whole analyszis is very important
because by just looking to those numbers
it's going to be really hard to
understand the importance of the
categories. But seeing the data as a
percentage how each category is
contributing to the whole sales of the
business makes it easier to understand
which category is underperforming or top
performing. And now you have a very
simple formula where you can go and
change the metrics. For example, instead
of total sales, you can go and change
the aggregations to total number of
orders or the total number of customers.
So you can go and bring any type of
measures and bring it to this analyszis
and you're going to generate completely
new view for the decision makers in
order to develop a new strategy for the
business. It was very interesting. Now
in the next step, we're going to do my
favorite topic where we're going to
start doing data segmentations using
SQL. So let's go.
Okay. So now what is data segmentations?
What we're going to do here is we're
going to go and group up the data based
on specific range. So that means we're
going to go and create a new categories
and then go and aggregate the data based
on the new category. And the formula for
that going to be very interesting. So
it's going to be this time we're going
to have a measure by a measure not by
dimension. So you have to go and pick
two different measures and convert one
of those measures to a range or to a
group and then aggregate the data by
this measure. So for example, we're
going to go and calculate the total
number of products by the sales range or
the total number of customers by the age
group. So as you can see we have two
measures and we are trying to combine
them together in order to create new
insights. Let's have the following
example. So here for example we have
like two measures and now the first step
is that we're going to take one of those
measures and convert it to a dimension.
converted to a category. For example,
we're going to say if the values are
like equal or below 100, it will be
converted to a category called low. And
between 100 and 200, it's going to be
assigned to a new category called
medium. And everything above 200, it's
going to be large. So, as you can see
what we are doing, we are taking one
measure and based on the range of this
measure, we are building a new
categories, new dimension. And now the
final step is the easiest one. We're
going to go and aggregate another
measure based on the new category. So
we're going to have seven for low, six
for medium, and 15 for large. So with
that, as you can see, we are creating
new categories or segments based on a
measure. And then we are aggregating
another measure based of this new
segments. And in SQL, in order to create
those new categories and segments, we
use the amazing case when statements
because it's going to help us to define
the rules and based on the range, it's
going to go and create a new category
and labels. So now let's go and apply
this formula on our data set in order to
segment our data. So let's go. Okay. So
now let's go and segment our data and
all what we need is two measures. So now
we have the following task and it says
segment products into cost ranges and
count how many products fall into each
segment. So now by looking to this task
we have two measures. First the costs
and as well the second one is the total
number of products. And of course we
have to go and segment one of those two
measures. And in this task we are
segmenting the costs. So we have to
focus now on taking this measure and
convert it to a dimension. So now all
those informations are available in the
table products. So now let's go and
select few columns. We're going to get
the product key and let's get the
product name and the costs. That's all
what we need. So let's execute it. Now
as you can see this is our measure the
costs. Now we have to go and convert
this measure to dimension. And in order
to do that, we use the case win
statements. We always use the case win
statement in order to create new
categories. So let's go and do that.
Case win. Let's start with the first
range. Let's say it is below 100. So all
the costs that are below 100. We're
going to label it with a new value. It's
going to be below 100. So now let's go
to the next range. We are saying when
costs now between 100 and 500. So all
costs between this range. They will get
the label 100 and 500. So this is very
simple. Let's go and get another range.
For example, between 500 and 1,000. Then
it's going to get a label between 500
and 1,000. And now it depend how many
categories and segments you want to
create. Each row of this case when each
condition will be creating like a new
value for your dimension. So I'm going
to stop with that. I'm going to say at
the end else. So if the cost is not
fulfilling any of those, it's going to
be above 1,000. Right? So that's it.
Let's give it a name. It's going to be
cost range. So now let's go and execute
it. Now let's go and check the result.
For example, the cost here is zero. It
is below 100, which is correct. This
value is above 1,000. This is between
500 and 1,000. And this is between 100
and 500. So everything looks correct.
Nice. So with that we are done with the
first step where we have converted one
measure into a dimension. So with that
we have now our segments. The next step
with that we're going to go and
aggregate the data based on this a new
dimension. So either you do it in one go
or what I usually do I put everything in
one city or a subquery and I'm going to
call it products
segments as based on this results I'm
going to go and aggregate the data. So
this is my temporary results and now
we're going to go and just aggregate the
data like this. So let's get first our
dimension cost range and then we need
our measure. So it's going to be count
product
key as total products from our city. It
was the product segments and then group
by our new dimension. That's it. It's
very simple. Let's go and execute it
now. Now you can see in the output we
have our segmented measure and we can
see the total numbers in each of those
segment and range and of course we can
go and order the data by our aggregation
the total products. Let's go and execute
it maybe descending. So now as you can
see we have a lot of products that are
not costing a lot. It is below 100.
After that between 100 500 and the
lowest number of products is in the
range that is above 1,000. So we don't
have a lot of products that are costing
a lot and that's because maybe we have a
lot of accessories in the business. So
my friends this is very powerful. If
your dimensions in the data set is not
enough to create insights you can take
one of your measures convert it to a
dimension using case win and then
aggregate your other measures based on
this new dimension. So we are deriving
new informations and as I told you by
just following this concept measures and
dimensions you can generate endless
amount of reports even if your business
or your data set is small. Okay my
friends so now let's go and segment
something else. So this time it's going
to be a little bit more complicated. So
we have the following task and it says
group customers into three segments
based on their spending behavior. So we
have the VIB customers. They are the
customers with at least 12 months of
history and spending more than 5,000.
And the second category we have the
regular customers. They have at least as
well 12 months of history but they spend
like less than 5,000. And the last
category we have the new customers.
Their lifespan is less than 12 months.
And we have to find the total number of
customers by each group. So now here we
have a lot of measures and stuff. So the
first one is the total number of
customers. This is going to be the final
aggregation that we're going to do. But
what is interesting, we're going to
build the segments and this time is
based on different columns. So first it
is based on a measure the total number
of months for each customer and as well
the total spending, the total number of
sales. So we have the sales, we have the
total number of months and as well the
total number of customers. So now we're
going to do it step by step. Don't you
worry about it. So now what I usually
do, I start collecting all the data that
I need. So what do we need? We need a
customer key. In order to do the
aggregation for the total number of
customers, we need as well the sales
amount right for the spending. And now
in order to calculate those number of
months, we need a date. And for that, we
have to calculate the lifespan of a
customer. And usually we create it using
the order date. I'm going to show you
how we're going to do it. So we need the
order date. And of course, we have to
select our table. So let's start with
the fact table. So fact sales and we're
going to join it with the
customers. So our dimension customers
and the key for that it is the customer
key as well for the customers. And here
we have to specify which column come
from which table. So the first one from
the customers, the sales from the fact
and the order date from the fact as
well. So now let's go and execute. Now
we can see we have our customers, the
sales and the order dates. So now the
sales going to help us in order to
specify the range of spending. But now
what is interesting we have to calculate
the lifespan. So now in order to get the
lifespan we have to find out the first
order and the last order of each
customer. So how many months is between
the first order and the last order. So
in order to do that we need the min
function for the order dates. So this is
the first order and the max in order to
get the last order. Right.
And since we are using min and max, we
have to go and group up the data. And we
need to do that anyway in order to get
the total spending. So for the sales
amount, we're going to have the sum in
order to have the total spend total
spending. And we don't need the order
age. And the dimension where we're going
to group up the data is by the customer
key. So let's go and execute it. So now
in the results we have a list of all our
customers and as well the total spending
for each customer and we have the first
order date and the last order dates. Now
in order to calculate how many months
between the first order and the last
order we can go and use the function
date diff in order to get a new measure.
So let's go and do that date diff. And
now since we need the number of months
we're going to use the month and then
the second argument going to be the
first order. So order date and the
second one going to be the latest. So
max order date and we're going to call
this lifpan. So let's go and query and
let's have a look to our results. You
can see for this customer 712 between
the first order and the last order we
have 11 muscles and for this customer
over here we have zero because the first
order and the last order is in the same
month and maybe there is only one order.
So with that we have the lifespan and as
you can see guys we have derived a new
measure from the dimension order age in
order later to derive from this new
measure a new dimension the segments. So
we are converting a dimension to a
measure and then from a measure to a new
dimension and this is usually what we do
in analyzes and in SQL. So now do we
have all the informations for the logic?
So we have the lifespan. So we have the
total number of monsters, we have the
total spending and I think we are ready
to start building our segments. So now
what we're going to do, we're going to
create the segments based on these
results that we have prepared. So this
result is the intermediate result before
the final one. Now either you're going
to put it in a CTE or subquery. Well, I
usually go and use the CTE. It is nicer.
So with customer
spending and I'm going to put the whole
thing in ECT and we can start writing a
new query from the scratch based on the
inter results. So let's go and select
again the customer key. I'm going to get
the total spending and the lifpan. So we
don't actually need the first and the
last order and we're going to get all
those informations from our new city. So
let's go and execute. And now let's
start building the segments. And as
usual, we're going to go and use the
case win statements. It is just amazing
statements in order to derive and build
new columns. So now what do we have for
the first category? So they are the
customers over 12 months and spending
more than 5,000. So now we're going to
say if the laugh span is higher than 12
and the total spending is higher than
5,000 then we have our VIB customers. So
this is the first label. Let's go to the
second one. If the lifespan as well I
think more than 12. So let's go and
check. Well, it is at least 12. I have
here mistake. So it's going to be larger
or equal. So now it is more correct. So
the customers that has at least 12
months but they spend like 5,000 or
less. So that means it's going to stay
the same condition but the total
spending will be less or equal 5,000s
and they are the regular customers. So
they will get this label. Now if it is
not fulfilling those two conditions what
this means this means this is a new
customer right. So they will get this
label. Let's go and have an end and
let's call it customer segments. So
let's go and execute it. Now let's have
a look for this customer 712. So the
total spending is less than 5,000. So
this customer is not a VIB and as well
the lifespan is less than 12. So that
means for us it is a new customer. Now
the next one we have a VIB. So this
customer has a history at least 12
months. So we have here 16 months and as
well the total spending more than 5,000.
That's why this customer is a VIB. But
now let's go and search for a regular
customer
2349. So this customer spent less than
5,000. So we are fulfilling this
condition over here and as well this
customer has at least 12 months of
history that's why we have a regular. So
now as you can see we have derived a new
dimension from two measures the lifespan
and the total spending. Now of course
the last step what is going to be we
have to go and find the total number of
customers for each of those categories.
So now what we're going to do we're
going to remove all those stuff and
we're going to start with our new
dimension and then comes the aggregation
count customer key. So as total
customers and then we have to group up
the data by our new dimension. So this
going to be really annoying if I'm going
to take this here and put it in the
group I because this means each time I'm
changing the logic I have to take care
of that twice. One in the select
statement and the second one in the
group I. So now actually instead of that
what I'm going to do I changed my mind.
I'm going to still having the
aggregation in the second step. So we
need the customer key we have the
definition of our customer segments. And
now I'm going to go and use the subquery
where I put the aggregation as a second
step. So my friends that means this is
again a second intermediate results. You
can of course put it in a second city.
So that means this is the first
intermediate results where we have
created the lifespan and the total
spending and the second intermediate
result is creating the customer segments
and the third step and the last one is
by doing the final aggregation. So we're
going to do it like this. Select our
dimension customer segments. Then we're
going to go and count the customer key
from our sub query. So this is our
subquery and don't forget to group by
our dimension customer segments. I think
I have it wrong. All right. So this is
the subquery and this is the final step
where we are aggregating everything. I'm
going to go and order the data by the
total customers like this. So now let's
go and execute the whole thing. Well
descending not ascending. Okay. Okay. So
now we can see from our results the
highest number of our customers belong
to the category new. So we have 14,000
customers that are new in our business.
And then the second category we have the
regular customers. So we have around
2,000 customers. And in VIB we have a
lot of VIB customers. So we have
1,655 VIB customers in our business. So
with that my friends, we have done data
segmentation. It is amazing. We have
segmented our customers based on their
spending behavior and as you can see all
those informations are totally derived
from the our data and this help us to
have a deep understanding of the
behavior of our customers and of course
this can help as well making smart
decisions. All right my friends so with
that we have covered the five different
types of data analytics thus we can do
using SQL. Now what I usually do as the
last tip in my project is that I try to
collect all the different types of
explorations and analyzes that I have
done in my data sets so that I can put
everything in one for example view or
table and then offer it to other users
and with that it going to help the other
users or stakeholders to make a quick
analyszis for decision- making. So now
what we're going to do, we're going to
have like some kind of requirements
where we're going to bring a lot of
different analyzes in one big script in
order to have insights about one object
like for example the customers. So I'm
going to show you the requirement of
this reports and we're going to analyze
it and start writing the scripts. So
let's go. Okay friends. So now let's
create a customer report and here are
the requirements for the report. So now
we have like a general statement. It
says this report should consolidate key
customer metrics and behaviors. So it
says first we have to gather all the
details about the customers like names,
age, transaction details and then we
have to segment the customers into
categories VIB, regular and new and as
well by the age groups and we have to
provide as well aggregations like the
total order, total sales, quantity,
products and so on. And we have to
generate important KPIs like the
recency, the average order value, the
average monthly spends. So we have a lot
of things and we're going to do it step
by step. All right. Now I'm going to
take you step by step in the process of
building a complex query that I usually
use in order to build a report. Now the
first thing that I usually do is I start
selecting the data from the database and
I usually start with the fact table. So
this is my starting point and then
usually I join it with the dimensions
and here I use lift join and after that
I think about how to filter the data
because usually we don't need all the
data that is available in the database
and of course in the result I will not
be selecting all the columns. I'm going
to be selecting only the relevant
columns that I need for my reports. So
since we have like complex query we will
be dividing the process into multiple
steps and I usually call this step the
base data and this going to be the
foundation the scope for the next steps
and since we have like multiple steps
I'm going to put this in a CTE so we
have this as an intermediate results and
what we're going to do in this step as
well we're going to do few
transformations like maybe calculating
and deriving new columns maybe
formatting the date so some basic
transformations so now let's go and
build this results for our report so the
first step is retrieving the core
columns from the tables. So let's go and
do it together. So we need of course our
fact table facts and we need our
dimension gold customer and as usual
we're going to go and connect them. All
right. Okay. So this is the basic and
now what we're going to do we're going
to go and retrieve all the columns that
we need for our reports. So let's start
picking stuff. So order number let's get
the product key the order date sales
amount quantity and I think that's all
from the facts let's go and get few
informations from the customers so let's
get the customer key the customer number
the first name and as well the last name
and what else we can go and get the
birth dates because we have to create
the age groups so birth dates let's go
and query. So I think those are all the
columns that we need in order to do the
next steps. And now before we go and
proceed with the aggregations, what
we're going to do, we're going to think
about filtering the data. As I recall,
we have some orders where the order date
is null. So I'm going to go and remove
those stuff. So order date is not null.
So that means in the first query the
base query not only I'm selecting the
columns that I need for the reports also
I'm defining the scope of the data sets
by filtering the data. So you can as
well make the scope here only one year
or something. Now what else we can do is
to think about all those columns and
whether we can do any type of
transformations in order to prepare them
for the aggregations. Like for example
I'm going to go and say you know what
instead of first and last name I'm going
to put them together in one. So it's
going to be the customer name. It's
better than having like two columns. So,
let's go and do it. We're going to say
concat and then we're going to start
with the first name and we're going to
have a separator between them. You can
have like a minus or a white space like
this and after that the last name. So,
let's call it customer name. And we can
go and get rid of those two columns. So,
let's go and execute. And with that, you
have everything in one column. Now,
another thing that we can prepare that
we don't need the birth date. We
actually need for our reports the age
groups. So that means we have to go and
calculate the age. So let's go and
transform it. So date diff we want it in
years, the birth date and the current
date from system and we're going to call
it age. So let's execute again. Perfect.
So with that we have all the data that
we need for our reports. Let's go and
put everything in one city. So I'm going
to call it with query as and put
everything in this city. And I'm going
to go and put this comment over here
inside the city. Perfect. And now we're
going to go and write a query from the
scratch. Paste on our intermediate
results. So base is query. It's execute.
All right. So now by looking to our
report with that we have the important
columns. Right. So now in the next step
we're going to do aggregations on top of
these intermediate results. So here
we're going to do all the aggregations
that is needed for the report and we're
going to put everything again in CTE as
an intermediate results which makes
everything a modular and easy to read.
So now let's go and do the necessary
aggregations on the result that we have
previously prepared. So that's why this
is very important as a second step in
our report. Always tend to make a
separated CTE only for aggregations. So
let's go and do that. I'm going to go
and select again all the customer
informations like the customer key
number, age. So I'm just going to copy
and paste and put it over here. And we
just need the column
names. So the key number, name, and age.
Now after that, we're going to start
doing aggregations. So what do you want
to aggregate is first, for example, the
total number of orders. So we're going
to go and count distinct order
number as total orders. So this is one
aggregation. We can go and summarize all
those sales
amounts as
total sales and the quantities as well.
So sum quantity as total quantity and as
well we can go and count how many
products did our customer order. So the
products key as total
products. So what I'm doing now I'm just
looking to our intermediate results and
try to figure out what we can aggregate
for example it makes no sense to
aggregate for example the ages right so
from the order number we have total
orders total product sales amount
quantity and from the right side we
cannot aggregate anything and that's
because they are the details of the
customers but from the fact table we can
do a lot of aggregations so now what we
can do with the order date over here we
can for example find the last order
dates from our customer which is really
nice information. So we can say max
order date as last order and of course
we can go and calculate the lifespan and
that we're going to need it as you
remember in order to categorize our
customer. So I will just copy and paste
it from the previous query is the date
diff month between the first order from
the customer and the last order of the
customer. So and we call this lifespan.
Okay. So we derived two measures or
aggregations from the order date. Now I
think we have done everything possible
and what is missing of course is to have
a group by because we are doing
aggregations and we are grouping by the
customer details. So going to be
customer key, customer number, name and
age. So I think we have everything for
our aggregations. Let's go and execute
it. A list of all customers and we have
few details about the customers and now
we have a lot of measures. So the total
order, total sales, total quantity,
products, the last order and the
lifespan. And with that we have covered
this part over here where we have
provided aggregations on the customer
level. So we have the details and we
have the aggregations. All right. So
with that we have now all the
preparations that is required to build
the final results. So it really depend
on the scenario. If it's possible we can
take all the data from one city or if
it's needed we can get it from multiple
cities. But in our scenario, we're going
to take it from the second city, the
aggregations, and we're going to prepare
the final results. So here we're going
to bring everything together and we
might introduce final transformations
that is needed for the reports. So let's
go and write the query for the final
results. Now we can go and start
segmenting our customer and as well
creating the KPIs. So let's go to the
third step. I'm going to go and put this
in a CTE. So let's call it customer
aggregation.
And now based on these results, we will
write the final query. So I like always
to put a comment about the steps. So the
first city is the base query where we
just joined the data and prepared it.
And then the second query is for the
aggregations. And the final one is for
the final results. So let's go and start
writing our final query. We will start
with select. And I'm going to go and
list again all the customer
informations. So I'm going to go and get
again same things. We have the customer
key, customer number, name, age and so
on. And now after that we need to create
the age categories. And now after that
I'm going to go and get all those
measures as well from our query. But of
course without the calculations I just
need the names of
it. So with that we have everything from
our previous CTE. So the customer
aggregation. Okay. So let's just test
it. Now everything is working. So now
what we have to do? We have to create
few categories age category and as well
the segments of the customers right for
segmenting the customers we have already
done the query so I will just copy and
paste it from the previous analyszis it
looks like this if the lifespan is at
least like 12 months and the sales above
5,000 then a less or equal 5,000 then
regular otherwise it is a new customer
so this is our first segment but the
second segment about the ages we're
going to go and build it now and again
how we going to do it when so if the age
for example example less than 20 then
the customer is under 20. Let's make
another range where we say if the
customer age is
between 20 and let's say
29 then we have the second range and we
can keep repeating the same thing for
the second one. It really depend how
many categories you want to build. So 30
and 39 I belong to this group. Now the
next one let's have the 40s as well
right so 40 49 same thing over here and
now else let's say 50 and above right
and above so let's go and end it as age
group I just want to sort it little bit
like this okay now it looks nice so with
that again we have turned a measure into
a dimension and let's go and execute it
now so now by checking the results we
have the details of the customers and
Now we have a new category. So as you
can see it is working. 54 it is above
50. This is in the range between 40 and
49. We have here 67 above 50. I believe
we don't have any customer that is below
20. Right? Or even between 20 and 30.
Okay. So with that we have created our
two categories and by looking to the
reports you see we can segment the
customers now into categories. The VIB,
regular, new and the age group. And with
that we have covered all those three
requirements and we come now to the last
requirements. We have to calculate the
following KPIs. Now the first one it is
an easy one. It is the recency. How many
months since the last order we have
calculated over here the last order for
the customer. It is this one. And now in
order to find the recency it is very
simple. So all we have to do is to take
this over here. I will just put it maybe
after the segmentation. And all what you
have to do is to use the date diff as
usual. So month is the last order date
and the get date. So as you can see we
are using this setup like in many
analyzes right we always find the
differences between a date from our data
sets and the current date and time and
with that we will get the recency. So
let's go and execute it. Now you can see
how many months since the last order of
the customer and of course you can go
and test it using the last order date.
And this is really important in order to
understand whether the customer is still
active or inactive. Okay, so this is for
the first easy KPI. Now let's go to the
second one. It says calculate the
average order value. So how we going to
do this? Let's go back over here. Now in
order to compute the average order
value, we have to divide the total sales
by the total orders. So how many revenue
did the customer generate? And we divide
it by the total number of orders and
after that we have to find the average.
So it is very simple. Let's go and write
that. We're going to go to the end of
our table where we're going to put our
KPI and I'm going to say here compute
average order value. So as a shortcut
AVO. So we say total sales divided by
total orders. And let's call it average
order value. So let's go and execute it.
And if you go to the last over here, you
can see the average order value of our
customers. But now if you are dividing
numbers together you have to be careful
that you are not dividing by zero
otherwise you will get an error. So
imagine that a customer has a zero
didn't order anything you might get an
error. In our scenario, we don't have
that because we are starting from the
order table or the fact table. But
still, I like to make sure this never
happens. And for that, I usually go and
use the case when statements. Very
simple one. If the total orders is equal
to zero, then make it zero. Otherwise,
do the calculation that we talked about.
So like this. And at the ends, we will
add an end. So that's it. And with that,
I make sure we will never divide by
zero. So that's it. It was simple,
right? Let's go to the last KBI the
average monthly spend. So how we will
calculate that
compute average monthly spend. So now
since we are speaking about the spending
that means we need the total sales.
Right? So how much sales did the
customer generate totally and then we
divide it by the number of months and
with that we will get the average
monthly spend. Right? So that means we
can divide the total sales by the
lifespan as we calculated it is the
period where the customer has been
active from the starts until the end.
Okay. So now let's do it step by step.
First we have to be careful that we are
not dividing by zero and I believe in
the lifespan we have zeros. So what
we're going to say as usual case when
lifespan is equal to zero then this time
we will not make it zero the customer
exist only for one month. So what we can
do we can get the total sales of the
customer and we don't have to divide it
by the month in order to find the
average because the average is equal to
the current total
sales. So with that we make sure we are
not dividing by zero otherwise we're
going to have our calculation. So total
sales divided by life span. So the total
sale divided by the months and with that
we will get the average monthly spend.
So and and ass and we're going to call
it average monthly spend. Perfect. So
let's go and try that out. Let's go to
the right side. And with that we have
our third KPI and we have the average
monthly spends. And with that guys, we
have now full reports about the
customers and we have covered all the
requirements. All right. So with that we
have the final results and we have
fulfilled the requirements. So what
we're going to do, we're going to take
the whole query and put it in the
database as a view. And once we have the
view, the report in the database, we can
share it with the others. Now the other
data analyst in the team can go and
maybe create a dashboard in order to
visual data using API tool like Tableau
or PowerBI. But in this scenario, the
user can go and connect your view the
last prepared data to the dashboard. And
with that the user can quickly generate
insights without doing a lot of steps in
order to prepare the data for the
visualizations. And of course the data
analyst can go and connect the
dimensions and facts. But having this
one solid view it's going to be like way
easier to consume. And of course the
data analyst can as well write a query
on top of your view in order to generate
a quick insights. So as you can see
using only SQL you are covering a lot of
complex steps in order to make the data
ready for reporting and analyzes and
this is what usually happened in real
projects. We're going to go and put the
query in the database so that the others
can use it. So what we're going to do
very simple create review and we're
going to put it in a good layer and
we're going to call it report customers
and then ask like this and let's go and
execute it. It is successful. Now if you
go to our database and check the views
you will find a new view called gold
report customers. Now all what you have
to do is to go and have a simple select.
So codes reports customers and you will
get an amazing report about the
customers. This kind of reporting it is
very important because you are giving a
full picture 360° view of all your
customers. So you have details,
categories, measures everything in one
go and it going to makes life easier.
Now for any user of this view to quickly
understand the data and generate maybe
insights based in this one view that can
helps of course your customers. So I
just want to show you now what this
means. If a user using your reports so
either in SQL or maybe they're going to
go and connect it to PowerBI or Tableau
they can generate immediately insights.
So for example, if they go and say count
customer number so as total customers
and then they're going to go and take
any dimension for example the age group.
So something like this and then group by
the age group. Put just put it here
first. And then they're going to go and
add any other measure. For example, the
total
sales and any other measure that you
have in this view and then execute and
quickly they can do analyszis on top of
your view without having them to go to
their fact and dimensions. So this is
like one extra prepared layer the data
model that you have built. And if you
don't want to group it by the ages, you
can go and have the customer segments
and it will be working. So quickly they
can analyze the new derived informations
that you have prepared in your reports.
So guys, this is amazing reports about
the
customers. And now what you're going to
do, you're going to go and prepare the
second report where you have to build
complete insights about the products of
the business. It is very similar to the
customers. So we want to generate a
report for the products. You have to
provide details like the product name,
category, subcategory and the costs. You
have to segment the products by the
revenue. So you can have categories like
high, medium and low. And then you have
to provide the basic aggregations at the
level of the products and then calculate
few KPIs. So as you can see it is very
similar to the customers. And now what
you have to do you have to pause the
video follow the same step at the
customers where we join the tables car
create aggregations and put everything
like in CTE and at the end once you are
done create the view where you have the
report about the products. So I'm going
to go now and do it offline and I will
see you
[Music]
soon. Okay my friends I hope you are
done with the reports. I'm going to show
you quickly how I've done it. So I've
just created a new view called report
products and then we start with the base
query where we have joined the fact
table with the dimension products and
collected all the columns that we need
for the reports and we put everything in
the first city. So this is the first
step and there was from my side no need
for any transformations over here. So we
go now to the second step and here we
have to put all the different types of
aggregations in one go. So we calculate
the lifespan, the last sales order,
total orders, total customers, sales
quantity and as well I have created the
average selling price of the products.
It is very simple. We are dividing the
sales amount by the quantity. So this is
the basic aggregations about the
products and finally we have the final
query. So we start with selecting the
basic informations about the products.
So we have the key, name, category and
then we have here the recency and we
have our new segments. This one is very
easy for the products. So we are saying
if the total sales is higher than 50,000
then this is a high performer and if
it's like between 50 and 10k then this
is a mid-range otherwise it is low
performer. So the segmentations of the
products is very simple and after that
we have like all our measures that we
aggregated in the CTE and now we come to
the two KBIS. It is very similar to the
customers. So the first one the average
order revenue it is simply dividing the
sales by the total orders and you have
to take care of the zeros of course and
the average monthly revenue we divide
the total sales by the lifespan of the
products and of course if the lifespan
is zero so it is only one month then it
is the total sales and with that you
generate the average monthly revenue. So
as you can see it is very similar to the
customers but still the focus here is
the products. Now of course we put this
query in view. So we have the report
products side by side by the report
customers and now we have really amazing
report about the products where we have
everything. So we have a lot of details
about the customers. We have as well a
dimension in order to segment our
products and we have a lot of measures
that are really important about each
products. So we have the total number of
orders sales, how many customers did
order the products, the average price,
the average revenue and the monthly
average revenue. And this gives you
really deep insights about each product
of your business. And of course, this is
very helpful in order to compare the
products, right? And now, of course,
this is core analyzis that you're going
to need it a lot in your business.
That's why we offer it as a view. So, I
think we have now two amazing reports
about our
data. All right, my friends. So, now
don't forget to put all your work in the
Git repository in order to share it with
others as a successful project. So as
usual we have the data sets,
documentations and as well the scripts
that you have done through this projects
and here I'm putting everything
together. So we have all the activity of
the exploration as well with the
advanced analyszis that we have done. So
we have the change over time, the
cumulative analyszis, performance, data
segmentations, part tool analyszis and
as well our two new reports. So I
recommend you if you haven't done that
yet go and create now a repository put
all your work there to make sure that
everyone can access and see your work
and my friends don't forget to add nice
commenting on your code and formatting
and styling your code should be perfect.
So if you haven't done that yet go and
do it now. All right my friends so with
that we have done the last step in our
road map. We have created two solid
reporting for our users. And with that,
we have completed all the steps of our
advanced analytics projects. And with
this project and the previous projects,
you can see now the full picture on how
to do data analytics on any data sets
using SQL. So starting by the first step
where we have explored the database and
end up having a very solid reports where
we have consolidated everything in one
view and with that we have now really
great understanding about the business,
about our data. And now what you can do,
you can go and grab any data sets in the
internet and you can go through all
these faces again and I promise you at
the end you will have a full picture and
understanding of the business and this
is what I exactly do in each project if
I want to understand any type of data
sets. All right my friends. So with that
we have covered the last type of SQL
projects the advanced data analytics.
And with that we have now three solid
projects using SQL and they are very
similar to real world projects in the
industry especially if you want to be a
data engineer or a data analyst. And my
friends we have covered the last chapter
in our course. So this is the advanced
level in SQL. And those are all the
chapters that I have designed for you to
take you from the basics to intermediate
and then to the advanced topics. My
friend, you made it. Congrats. You
should be really proud of yourself. And
now with that, I can say that I have
shared everything that I know about SQL
and you can now solve any complex task
using SQL like I do in my real projects.
And I hope that you have enjoyed the
journey. And if you do and you want me
to create more free courses like this,
make sure to support the channel by
subscribing, liking, and commenting.
This of course going to make the channel
grow, reach the others, and as well
motivates me to make more content like
this. So nothing left to say. Thank you
so much for watching and I will see you
in the next course.